# Josephine Airey

Josephine died of pneumonia on October 25, 1899. The citizens of Helena gave her a magnificent funeral with many speeches praising her accomplishments. In the final years of her life she lived under meager conditions. The glory of her early days had been dried up in the panic of 1893. Her death saddened the community and made front-page news. Her generosity was noted and she was buried in the cemetery at a Catholic church.

# John David Albert

Albert survived three wives, all of whom were partially or fully Mexican and all of whom died while married to him, and fathered 21 children before his death in Montana. He is buried in the old Catholic Cemetery at Walsenburg, Colorado.

# Alfred, Hereditary Prince of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha

The exact circumstances of Alfred's death are not known, and varying accounts have been published.  His sister Marie's memoirs simply say his health "broke down", and other writers have said that he had "consumption".:62 The Times published an account stating he had died of a tumor,:62 while the Complete Peerage gives the generally accepted account that he "shot himself". Various authors have speculated on reasons why he might have killed himself, and one author, Frank Bush, claimed to have been a descendant of a secret marriage between Alfred and Mabel Fitzgerald, granddaughter of the 4th Duke of Leinster, and claimed that friction between Alfred and his family over the "secret marriage" was the cause of the suicide.:176, fn. 2[a] Despite the lack of documentary evidence, and the lack of contemporary reference, other authors have repeated Bush's assertion that Alfred and Mabel married, including John van der Kiste and Bee Jordaan in Dearest Affie, and the assertion is repeated as fact in the official family history (Das Haus von Sachsen-Coburg und Gotha).

According to theory, Alfred shot himself with a revolver while the rest of the family was gathered for the anniversary celebration. He survived and was looked after at Schloss Friedenstein in Gotha (Thuringia) for three days before being sent to the Martinnsbrunn Sanatorium in Gratsch near Meran in the County of Tyrol (Austria-Hungary, now Italy). Alfred died there at 4:15 pm on 6 February 1899, aged 24 years. He was buried in the ducal mausoleum of the Friedhof am Glockenberg [de], Coburg, Bavaria (southern Germany).:47

Later in 1899 Alfred's uncle the Duke of Connaught and his son Prince Arthur of Connaught renounced their succession rights to the Duchy of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha.  As a result, his first cousin Prince Charles Edward, Duke of Albany, became heir presumptive.

# Grant Allen

Grant Allen died of liver cancer at his home on Hindhead, Haslemere, Surrey, England, on October 25, 1899. He died before finishing Hilda Wade. The novel's final episode, which he dictated to his friend, doctor and neighbor Sir Arthur Conan Doyle from his bed, appeared under the appropriate title, "The Episode of the Dead Man Who Spoke" in the Strand Magazine in 1900.

# John Wolfe Ambrose

Ambrose died on May 15, 1899 from typhoid. He never lived to see the completion of the new channel, which occurred in 1907. (The Lusitania was the first ship to enter the channel in September 1907.) However, in recognition of his efforts, the New York State Legislature in 1900 officially expressed gratitude for Ambrose and named the channel and its lightship after him. Today, the Ambrose Channel still serves as the main entrance into New York Harbor for ocean vessels, and the Lightship Ambrose, a registered National Historic Landmark, is open to the public at Lower Manhattan's South Street Seaport Museum. 

On June 3, 1936, the City paid tribute to one of its greatest Irish-immigrant sons. Before a crowd of 500 attendees, a memorial bust monument of Ambrose was erected in his honor and originally unveiled at Battery Park by his daughter, Katharine Wolfe Ambrose Shrady, and Mayor Fiorello La Guardia. Mayor La Guardia referred to Ambrose "as the pioneer of an idea. Mr. Ambrose was a man ahead of his time. He had vision and persistence to...continually press...his idea" (New York Times, June 4, 1936). Sadly, in November 1990, the bust was stolen and never recovered. However, in late 2017, the City Parks Department finally recreated a new bust and restored the monument, perhaps even surpassing its original beauty. On May 15, 2018—on the anniversary of Ambrose's death—the City held an official statue unveiling and rededication ceremony, which was attended by about 100 people, half of whom were descendants of Ambrose, traveling from eleven different states and Ireland. The newly-restored monument has been relocated from its original location of behind the old Aquarium to the edge of State Street, between Pearl and Water Streets, at The Battery.

Ambrose had the vision to see into the future enough to know that unless the New York Harbor was improved, New York would not be able to compete commercially in the world marketplace or remain an economic giant. Because of his efforts, John Wolfe Ambrose's futuristic vision of New York has been realized.

# Duff Armstrong

Armstrong lived long after the war; his death was reported in The New York Times on May 14, 1899.

William Duff Armstrong is buried in the New Hope Cemetery in Mason County, IL. A plaque is erected at his gravesite which reads, "WILLIAM DUFF ARMSTRONG accused slayer of Preston Metzker, May 7, 1858 freed by Lincoln in Almanac Trial".

# William Yates Atkinson

Atkinson died on August 8, 1899 at the age of 44. He is buried in Oak Hill Cemetery in Newnan. Atkinson County, Georgia is named for him.

His son, William Yates Atkinson, Jr., was the Georgia Democratic state chair in 1942 as well as a Georgia state Supreme Court justice from 1943 to 1948.

Atkinson Hall, on the campus of Georgia College and State University, is named for him.

# Anton Bacalbașa

Eventually, Bacalbașa formalized his split with the socialist party. From 1896, both he and his rival Scorțescu were members of a PNL splinter group, presided upon by lawyer Nicolae Fleva. He served the "Flevist" cause as a writer for Dreptatea daily, then as a public speaker, organizing rallies at Dacia Hall and agitating the public for the reinstatement of Ghenadie Petrescu as Metropolitan-Primate. All three Bacalbașas, together with Fleva and the Lumea Nouă socialists (represented by A. Ionescu), also protested when PNL Prime Minister Dimitrie Sturdza expelled Aromanian refugees for having questioned his Balkans policy. Soon, Toni embarked on an additional venture, creating a satirical magazine named after (and featuring stories with) Moș Teacă. In its first series, the periodical hosted a lampoon piece by the young leftist writer Gala Galaction and Toni's own satirical portrait of Caragiale as a political opportunist, gravitating between the Junimists and George Panu's Radicals.

The journalist settled down to a family life, marrying Alexandrina Scărișoreanu (who was ten years his younger). He also accepted an offer from Transylvania's Vatra magazine (co-edited by Caragiale) to set up its satirical supplement Hazul ("Fun"), but the venture failed to interest the public and was abandoned. On March 22, 1898, Bacalbașa began reissuing Moș Teacă, introduced as Jurnal Țivil și Cazon ("Civilian and Military Newspaper"). One of its preferred targets was Mille, referred to in the paper as Millu Crocodilu ("Mill[e] the Crocodile"). The co-author of such material was Ranetti-Namuna, who arrived there after a stint at Lupta.

During 1899, Bacalbașa followed Fleva's group as it merged into the Conservative Party. His presence alongside Maiorescu was recorded with displeasure by the Junimist Ioan Slavici, as one of the reasons why Conservative politics had become ineffectual. A Conservative cabinet was called to power, with Fleva as the Agriculture Minister, and Bacalbașa ran in the general election of 1899, earning an Ilfov County seat in the Assembly of Deputies. Toni still pursued his literary interests: together with "Constantin Ivan" (the common pseudonym of his two brothers), he wrote the 3-act political revue Pardon!.

This was to be his last known endeavor: on October 1, 1899, having contracted bacterial pneumonia, Bacalbașa died, and was buried at Bellu cemetery. Public mourning was taken up by both Fleva and Caragiale. According to the former: "Through every sort of trouble, through every storm I ever had to cross into, I felt strong knowing that Anton Bacalbașa was with me. It is to his talent, his heart and his friendship that I owe the best years of my public life." The same year, the PSDMR itself disappeared from the scene: Ioan Nădejde and his "generous ones" faction denounced socialist politics as too feeble for the Romanian context, and joined the PNL, leaving a minority, under C. Z. Buzdugan, I. C. Frimu and Christian Rakovsky, to establish a more radical workers' party (embryo of the post-1910 Social Democratic Party).

# Fredrik Glad Balchen

In 1873, Balchen was rewarded the Order of St. Olav for his efforts for the deaf. He was also appointed member of a committee that should prepare a law granting the deaf, blind and mentally handicapped the right to compulsory education. A such law came into force for the deaf on 1 July 1883, for the blind in 1885 and for the mentally handicapped in 1891. After having stepped down from his positions at the deaf school, Balchen died, at age 84.

# Elisabeth Bardwell

Towards the end of her life, Bardwell resided in Greenfield, Massachusetts with her sister.Unfortunately, her sister passed away in 1895, leading to a long period of grief for Bardwell who felt very close with her sister. Seven years prior to her death, Bardwell was diagnosed with a severe illness that she never fully recovered from.On May 27,1899, Elisabeth Bardwell passed away with one of her sisters by her side. In terms of her legacy, Bardwell is remembered as being a large part in the idea of believing in God, yet still challenging and investigating what is accepted as true.The tributes read at her memorial included:

"When I first met Miss Bardwell I stood in awe of her, but soon finding her sympathy and tenderness, learned to go to her in trouble."

"How safe I felt about everything I had committed to her care! How true she was to every interest and to every friend!"

# William Malone Baskervill

He died in 1899.

# Francisco Bauzá

He died in 1899.

# Elisha Baxter

Baxter died in Batesville, Arkansas and is buried at Oaklawn Cemetery in Batesville, Arkansas.

Baxter County, Arkansas was named after Elisha Baxter.

# Charles Lewis Beale

Beale died in Hudson, Columbia County, New York, on January 30, 1899. He is interred at Kinderhook Cemetery, Kinderhook, New York.

# Martin V. Biscailuz

Biscailuz was released from jail on April 13, 1898, and was sent immediately to the Los Angeles County Hospital, "a mental and physical wreck." He died there on June 22, 1899, and was buried in the Cathedral Catholic cemetery under the direction of his brother and his son.

# Washington Irving Bishop

On May 12, 1889, Bishop became unconscious for the second time in one of his demonstrations while performing at the New York City theatrical society known as The Lambs Club.  He was taken upstairs to a bedroom, where he was reported to have been in a coma and died at noon the next day. However, Bishop was alleged to have suffered from cataleptic fits, remaining in a trance state for many hours, he even carried a card on him that explained no autopsy should be performed on him until at least after 48 hours. The card was never found on his body.

On May 13, the physicians John A. Irwin, Frank Ferguson and Irwin H. Hance who had examined Bishop, performed an unauthorized autopsy on him at a funeral home. John A. Irwin was reported to have wanted to study Bishop's brain with an autopsy for years. Bishop's death certificate gave the cause of death as hysterocatalepsy.

Bishop's mother Eleanor and his wife both claimed that he was not dead, but in a trance state whilst the physicians examined his body. They claimed that he was murdered by surgical instruments during the autopsy. They alleged that he had suffered from cataleptic attacks and could remain in trance up to 52 hours. These claims were denied by physicians who had examined the body. Eleanor brought charges against the physicians but the case ended in a hung jury and nobody was charged.

# Richard P. Bland

Richard P. Bland died at his home in Lebanon, Missouri on June 15, 1899. He had been in failing health for some years, and in the spring of 1899 returned to Lebanon from Washington, D.C. to recover from a severe throat infection, but his condition only worsened. He is buried in the Calvary Catholic Cemetery in Lebanon, Missouri. A crowd of several thousand flocked to the small Missouri Ozarks town to attend Bland's funeral.

# Franz Johann Joseph Bock

Bock died in Aachen April 30, 1899. The city of Aachen made Bock an honorary grave in the Campo Santo Teutonico in Rome, where a bronze plaque commemorates him.

# Henry St John, 5th Viscount Bolingbroke, 6th Viscount St John

Henry St John died in November 1899. After the funeral the existence of a wife and heir was revealed, a scandal which was reported in all the British newspapers. Mary continued to live at Lydiard Park and died in February 1940.

# James Lord Bowes

Bowes died of a heart attack on a train en route from London to Liverpool on 27 October 1899 and is buried in Toxteth Park Cemetery (Smithdown Road) Liverpool. The Bowes Museum of Japanese Art closed following his death. Attempts to find a new home for his extensive collection failed and the contents of the museum were sold at an 11-day public auction in Liverpool in May 1901. Charlotte died in 1923 in Liverpool at the age of 79.

# Daniel Montgomery Boyd

Boyd married twice during his lifetime. His first wife was Caroline A. Bockius, daughter of Samuel Blockius of Germantown; they married in 1869. After her death in 1878, Boyd married Ida Cottrell, daughter of Joseph W. Cottrell of Columbia. This union produced two children: Daniel Montgomery and Elsie M.

Boyd and his family were all members of the Presbyterian Church, and Boyd was a trustee of the church. He was a Republican throughout his entire life. Boyd built a house in Queen Anne style at 5 Bloom Street in Danville in the 1880s. He was living in this house as late as 1899, the year of his death.

Boyd suffered from a serious attack of influenza in the winter of 1897/1898 and his health never fully recovered. He died on July 4, 1899 at the age of 73.

According to J.H. Beers' Historical and Biographical Annals of Columbia and Montour Counties, Pennsylvania, Boyd was "one of the men to whom Montour County owes a debt of gratitude for his share in its development and prosperity". He provided aid in getting many of Danville's industries to a financially stable state and contributed to the social and business development of Danville. An 1899 book described him as a "liberal supporter financially of all worthy enterprises".

# Henri Bretonnet

In the same year Bretonnet's former roommate at the naval academy, Captain Émile Gentil, who had just returned from his mission to Lake Chad, persuaded the government to give him command of an expedition that would provide to solve the issues that Gentil's departure had left open, and prepare the ground for Gentil's future mission. On October 10 Bretonnet left France, with his second Lt. Solomon Braun; news arrived shortly after that Rabih az-Zubayr, the greatest ruler in the Chad Basin, had attacked Baguirmi, whose king was a French protégé. In France, the government reacted by ordering reinforcements to be sent to Bretonnet, and the preparations for the Gentil Mission were accelerated. Bretonnet was advised to reach the Chari River and unite his forces with those of the Baguirmians.

On June 15 Bretonnet reached the French post of Kouno on the Chari, having with him only half a hundred Senegal riflemen and two officers, but also three cannons, and was shortly after met by Gaourang, the king of Baguirmi, with 400 men. Bretonnet wrote a letter, on July 8, to Gentil, whose expedition had arrived in Middle Congo and was not very distant, in which he wrote that he did not trust the rumours that Rabih in person was marching on Kouno, but all the same asked Gentil to send him Captain Julien with his 130-strong company.

The letter arrived in Gentil's hands when it was already too late; Rabih was effectively marching on Kouno at the head of 2,700 men with firearms and 10,000 auxiliaries. With the enemy approaching, Bretonnet evacuated Kouno and entrenched himself in the nearby hills of Togbao; here on July 17 took place the battle with Rabih's forces, in which Bretonnet, Braun and all his men were massacred, except for three wounded Senegalese that were taken prisoners. One of these escaped, and informed on August 16 Gentil of Bretonnet's death.

# Joseph Brown (Missouri politician)

On December 3, 1899, Brown died. He was buried in Grandview Cemetery in Alton, Illinois.

# Gridley J. F. Bryant

Bryant died on June 8, 1899 in his townhouse in Boston, Massachusetts. He was survived by his wife, Louisa Bryant whom he married on September 9, 1839. His only known commission in the south was Thornbury, a plantation house built in the 1840s for Henry King Burgwyn, in Northampton County, North Carolina. Upon his death his wife assembled all of his books and drawing in his home study and burned down his house, at the request of his will.

# José Torres Bugallón

On February 4, 1899, the Philippine–American War erupted. Bugallon rejoined Luna in the field immediately.

The next day, February 5, saw them in La Loma hill, the present day site of La Loma Cemetery, between Manila and Caloocan City. While holding the line, American troops under General Arthur MacArthur, Jr. charged and outflanked them. As a result, Bugallon and his men were exposed to enemy fire, and he sustained a bullet in his thighs.

Upon learning from that Bugallón was wounded, Luna ordered: 

Luna found Bugallón severely wounded and prostrate in a ditch along the road. "Don't expose yourself so much. Don't advance any farther," Bugallón said.

For his bravery, Luna immediately promoted Bugallón to lieutenant colonel. The wounded hero was rushed by train to the medical station in Caloocan, hoping that he could be kept alive until he can be brought to the hospital in Malolos. However, it was too late; after inquiring if the Filipino reinforcements have arrived, and expired in Luna's arms. Allegedly, Luna unashamedly wept for Bugallón.

# J. Russell Bullock

Bullock died on May 7, 1899, in Bristol.

# Robert Bunsen

When Bunsen retired at the age of 78, he shifted his work solely to geology and mineralogy, interests which he had pursued throughout his career. He died in Heidelberg at the age of 88.

# Henry L. Cake

He died in Northumberland, Pennsylvania in 1899, and was interred in the Riverview Cemetery.

# Charles C. Carpenter (admiral)

Carpenter had begun to suffer from severe nervous disorders during the final years of his naval career and sought medical treatment soon after his retirement. His condition improved, but around mid-February 1899 his health went into decline again, and he spent six weeks in the Adams Nervine Asylum in the Jamaica Plain neighborhood of Boston, Massachusetts, for treatment. Although his condition again showed signs of improvement, he committed suicide at the asylum by shooting himself in the head on the morning of April 1, 1899. He was survived by his wife, three sons, and two daughters.

Carpenter is buried at Proprietors Burying Ground in Portsmouth, New Hampshire.

# William H. Cate

While on a visit in Toledo, Ohio, Cate died of cancer on August 23, 1899 (age 59 years, 285 days).  He is interred at the City Cemetery in Jonesboro, Arkansas.

# Aldebert de Chambrun (1821-1899)

De Chambrun died on February 6, 1899.

# Ernest Chausson

When only 44 years old, Chausson died while staying at one of his country retreats, the Château de Mioussets, in Limay, Yvelines. Riding his bicycle downhill, Chausson hit a brick wall and died instantly. The exact circumstances remain unclear; although probably a freak accident, there has been the suggestion of suicide, as Chausson was certainly prone to depression. This suicide theory was propounded by Debussy's biographer Edward Lockspeiser, but has been firmly rejected more recently by Chausson's own biographer Ralph Scott Grover.

Chausson was buried in Père Lachaise Cemetery in Paris. His funeral was attended by many leading figures of the arts, including Duparc, Fauré, Albeniz, Redon, Edgar Degas, Auguste Rodin, Henri de Régnier, Pierre Louÿs and Debussy. While Chausson's brotherly relationship with Debussy had ended abruptly five years earlier, following his disapproval of Debussy's promiscuity, Debussy never ceased to admire Chausson's music.

# Frank Edward Clarke (ichthyologist)

Clarke died on Saturday 1 July 1899 of heart disease.

# John S. Coffman

Coffman died at home at the age of 51 on July 22, 1899. The cause of death was a malignant growth in his stomach, from which he had suffered for a number of years. Funeral services were held in both Elkhart and Virginia. He was buried at Prairie Street Cemetery.

Coffman Hall is a building on Goshen College campus, which was named in his honor.

Coffman's personal papers are housed in the Mennonite Church USA Archives.

# John G. S. Coghill

In 1869 Coghill returned to Edinburgh and was elected to the Fellowship of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh. He resumed his association with James Young Simpson, who was already by this time involved in his pioneering work on anesthesia in obstetrics. Coghill undertook the editing of some of Simpson’s papers and he delivered lectures on his behalf to the university students, on the subject of general pathology and pathological anatomy. He also attended to Simpson professionally during his final illness.

Failing to be elected as chair of obstetrics at the University of Edinburgh in 1875, a position which was controversially given to James Young Simpson (the nephew of the above mentioned Professor), Coghill and family moved to Ventnor, in the Isle of White. He went to work in the Royal National Hospital for Consumption and Diseases of the Chest which opened in 1868 and was its first consulting physician. The hospital was founded by Arthur Hill Hassal had himself suffered from tuberculosis while he was senior physician to the Royal Free Hospital, London and had moved to the Isle of Wight in search of a cure. The hospital became a part of the National Health Service in 1948.

Coghill embraced the field of tuberculosis enthusiastically although not wholly abandoning his interests as a generalist and in gynaecology. In 1894 he became a Knight Commander of the Order of St. Sava, from the Kingdom of Serbia, for his scientific contributions. He was elected a Corresponding Fellow of the Gynaecological Society of Boston; as Vice President of the British Gynaecological Association he addressed the appropriate section of the BMA meeting in 1881 and in 1887 was Vice President of the Therapeutics section of the International Medical Congress held in Washington USA. In 1888 he had the honour of receiving Queen Victoria on her visit to the hospital (his young son Harold ‘in Highland dress’ presented her with a bouquet).

He died in Ventnor on 5 June 1899 but is buried with his parents in Dean Cemetery in the west of the city. The grave is marked by a pale granite Celtic cross and lies in the small central southern section.

# Charles Francis Coghlan

Charles Francis Coghlan died in Galveston, Texas, on November 27, 1899, after a month's illness. He had originally come to the city with his company to perform "The Royal Box", but his illness prevented him from ever taking the stage. His body was temporarily placed in a metal casket and stored in a vault at a local cemetery to await further family instructions.  At first it was decided his remains would be interred on his farm in Fortune Bridge near the eastern tip of Prince Edward Island. Coghlan had sometime earlier purchased the property as a summer home and for his eventual retirement.  Several days after his death, it was announced through the press that his remains would be returned to New York for cremation. Nearly a year later the disposition of the body had yet to be decided and, in the interim, his casket was swept away from its resting place by a storm surge generated from the deadly Galveston Hurricane of 1900.  The New York Actors Club had, for several years, a standing reward for anyone who recovered Coghlan's  coffin. In January 1904 a metal coffin was found in a marsh; at first it was thought to have been Coghlan's; however it proved to be the remains of a New York man. Coghlan's coffin/remains was eventually found in January 1907 by a group of hunters who discovered it partially submerged in a marsh some nine miles from Galveston along the east coast of mainland Texas.

Years after his death, a story arose that Coghlan's metal casket had been recovered in 1907, not far from his Prince Edward Island proper, by a group of Canadian fishermen in the Gulf of Saint Lawrence, after drifting some two thousand miles along the East Coast of North America. Over the years some clever skeptic of this story referred to Coghlan's casket as the "homing coffin". The genesis of the Canadian fishermen tale appears to have come from a 1929 Ripley's Believe It or Not! column. The 1907 news reports of the recovery of his coffin/remains do not tell of the disposition of his remains; he was certainly not reburied on Prince Edward Island.

# Edmund William Cole

Cole was married twice. His first wife, Louisa McGavock, died in 1869; her funeral ceremony was conducted by reverends John Berry McFerrin and Robert A. Young. They lived at 182 Church Street. His second wife, Anna Russell, was a native of Augusta, Georgia whose father had served as the first Democratic mayor of Augusta after the Civil War. Their wedding, conducted by Bishop Holland Nimmons McTyeire, was attended by Confederate veterans Bushrod Johnson and Edmund Kirby Smith. The Coles first resided at Terrace Place, a three-story townhouse on Church Street in Nashville, until they moved into Colemere, a mansion designed for them by Confederate veteran and architect William Crawford Smith. They had a son, Whitefoord Russell Cole, who became a prominent businessman. Cole was a member of the Democratic Party, and he attended the McKendree United Methodist Church.

Cole died of heart disease on May 25, 1899 at the Fifth Avenue Hotel in New York City. His funeral was held at the McKendree United Methodist Church in Nashville. After his death, his widow hired sculptor George Julian Zolnay to design his bust; it was installed in Kirkland Hall, the administration building of Vanderbilt University. When Kirkland Hall burned down in 1905, it was replaced with a marble bust alongside his widow's portrait by Willie Betty Newman.

# Nelson D. Cole

Cole died from complications of his illness on July 31, 1899, in St. Louis, Missouri. He is buried in the Bellefontain Cemetery, in north St. Louis.

# George W. Cooper

He was the father of Kent Cooper of the Associated Press.[citation needed]

He died in Chicago, Illinois on November 27, 1899. He was interred in Garland Brook Cemetery, Columbus, Indiana.

# Agnes Cotton

Cotton died in Leytonstone on 20 May 1899 at The Pastures, and was buried with her family in St. John's Churchyard on 24 May. Cotton left monies for women who had assisted her, including Elizabeth Amelia Bragg, and her ward, Mary Agnes Hope.

Cotton's home continued to operate until the Second World War under the management of the Community of St. John Baptist, Clewer. In 1940 the home was evacuated to Northampton, and after the war it was never reopened.

# Robert Cox (politician)

Cox was in poor health towards the end of his life. He died at Aix-les-Bains on 2 June 1899, aged 54.

He is buried in Dean Cemetery in Edinburgh, in its north-east section not far from the entrance. He is also memorialised on his parent's grave in St Cuthbert's churchyard in the city centre.

# Jessie Craigen

The Local Government Act 1894 had created a system of urban and rural district councils, and had permitted women to be councillors. In December 1894, Jessie Craigen stood, as the only woman candidate, in the election for Ilford Urban District Council, on behalf of the Women's Liberal Association. She was unsuccessful, coming fourteenth out of seventeen candidates.

She died in her lodgings 2, Grove-villas, Ilford Lane, Ilford, Essex on 5 October 1899 when local newspapers described her as a ‘well-known old maiden lady’ and ‘miser’, who had shared her house with fifteen dogs. Her obituary in the Zoophilist declared that 'as a woman of the people, she exercised a great influence over the working classes...  We shall miss her courageous and outspoken advocacy… her racy and eloquent speeches'. Her belongings were left to Rosetta Blanche Vincent, spinster, of Church House, Uckfield, Sussex, who was granted probate on the will as sole executrix.

# Miriam Auhea Kekāuluohi Crowningburg

After the death of her cousin Lunalilo, Kalākaua was elected as the new Hawaiian monarch in 1874. The new king and Auhea shared a common ancestor in Kameʻeiamoku. However, from the start, Kalākaua and his siblings were openly challenged by Hawaiians loyal to Queen Emma, the widow of Kamehameha IV and a collateral descendant of the Kamehamehas in her own right. Wishing to quiet oppositions in the Hawaiian community to the new reigning family in regards to their genealogy, Auhea along with Ruth Keʻelikōlani openly acknowledged the House of Kalākaua.

In later life, Auhea became the kahu (caretaker or guardian) of the Lunalilo Mausoleum, her cousin's personal family tomb on the grounds of the Kawaiahaʻo Church. The aging chiefess witnessed the Overthrow of the Kingdom of Hawaii, the establishment of the Republic of Hawaii and finally Hawaii's annexation to the United States in 1898. Auhea died in Honolulu on May 16, 1899.
In acknowledgement of her chiefly status, she was buried in the lot outside the vault of Lunalilo's Mausoleum. Her grandson William Bishop Taylor is also buried near the mausoleum. After her death, her cousin High Chiefess Maria Beckley Kahea, the kahu of Mauna ʻAla since 1893 and another scion of the Hoʻolulu line, replaced her as kahu of the Lunalilo Mausoleum.
Hoʻolulu Street, near Kapahulu, Honolulu, was named by Auhea after her ancestor.

# Peter L. Cunningham

On April 22, 1899, Cunningham died suddenly while vising the Norwalk Hospital to view the building under construction. He fell while walking down a decline at the back of the building, and died shortly thereafter. The cause of death was believed to be apoplexy.

# Margaret Anna Cusack

In Newark, she once again came into controversy with the local Catholic hierarchy, this time regarding among other things, funding. and her public support of a suspended priest. She wrote a 176 page pamphlet entitled, "The Question of Today: Anti-Poverty and Progress, Labor and Capital". In it she defended social reformer Father Edward McGlynn. McGlynn was a vocal supporter of the political and economic views of Henry George, which some considered to border on socialism. George was popular with labor organizers, radicals, socialists, and Irish nationalists. Cardinal John McCloskey had reprimanded McGlynn and ordered him not to defend these views in public. McCloskey's successor, Archbishop Michael Corrigan ordered McGlynn to refrain from politics. McGlynn not only gave an address in support of George, (which earned him a two week suspension), but made the rounds of the polls with George on election day. He also publicly criticized a pastoral letter Corrigan had issued condemning theories that would violate an individual's right to private property. Corrigan then temporarily suspended McGlynn from his priestly functions for a second time. Corrigan viewed Cusack's pamphlet as an attack on the authority of the church, and demanded an apology. She attempted to halt its publication, but was unsuccessful. Her involvement in the New York City political campaign generated a good deal of controversy. Cusack resigned as head of her order.

She returned to the Anglican Communion and issued The Nun of Kenmare: An Autobiography the following year. Afterwards she lectured and wrote a number of anti-Catholic books: The Black Pope: History of the Jesuits, What Rome Teaches (1892) and Revolution and War, the secret conspiracy of the Jesuits in Great Britain (published posthumously, 1910).
She died on 5 June 1899, aged 70, and was buried in a Church of England-reserved burial site at Leamington Spa, Warwickshire, England.

Margaret Anna Cusack passed into obscurity for a long time, until as a result of Vatican II, religious orders were encouraged to review their roots and the intent of their founders. Since then there have been a number a studies on Cusack, such as Sister Philomena McCarthy's The Nun of Kenmare: The True Facts. With the rediscovery of the life and times of Margaret Anna Cusack, she has been hailed as a feminist -or not, and a social reformer ahead of her times.

# George R. Davis

Davis died in Chicago, and was interred in Rosehill Cemetery.

# Gussie Davis

An April 1899 article in The Freeman reported that Davis had purchased a home in Whitestone, New York and that he was recovering from a serious illness.  In August of that year, press releases indicated he would appear in A Hot Old Time in Dixie, going on the road in the coming season; this musical farce was Davis's property with Tom McIntosh.  On October 18, 1899, Davis died at home in Whitestone.

At the time of his death, Gussie Davis had published more than three hundred songs and certainly left more in manuscript.

# Frank R. Day

Day committed suicide in June 1899 when he sealed his room in the Van Dyke lodging house at 330 McAllister Street, San Francisco, and turned on all the gas jets. He left a note stating: "If my body is found, tell my friends at Wells, Fargo & Co. to bury me at Mountain View Cemetery, Oakland. My father, Loth [sic] Day, and mother, Celine Day, are buried there."

Of him, the San Francisco Call said:

" Having run through two moderate fortunes, having become divorced from two wives by reason of his dissipated habits, . . . Frank R. Day . . . ended his life with the hand of a suicide. . . . Day was a clever man, of good education, a pleasing address and a faculty for making friends. When not under the influence of liquor he was a charming companion and numbered among his friends many persons of considerable influence. . . . By the death of his father Day inherited considerable property, . . . but he ran through it in a short time..

# Ferdinand de Béhagle

In 1898 Émile Gentil had been given command of a new French mission to oppose Rabih in Bagirmi.
Henri Bretonnet was sent ahead with an advance party to rescue de Béhagle, and was met by Rabih on the Chari.
The battle of Togbao took place on 17 July 1899 on the banks of the Chari about 100 kilometres (62 mi) north of Fort Archambault (Sarh).
Bretonnet and most of his men were killed.
Rabih ordered the execution of de Béhagle on 15 October 1899.[c]
De Béhagle was hung and his body was thrown in a pit.
The incident made war between France and Rabih inevitable.

De Béhagle's body was recovered in 1901 by troops of colonel Georges Destenave, and buried at Fort Lamy (N'Djamena).
The rue Ferdinand-de-Béhagle was opened in Paris in 1932 in the 12th arrondissement near the Museum of African and Oceanic Arts, and was named after the explorer on 3 February 1936.

# Mary of the Divine Heart

Sister Mary of the Divine Heart Droste zu Vischering died on June 8, 1899, the feast of the Sacred Heart (properly Solemnity of the Most Sacred Heart of Jesus), three days before the world consecration, which had been deferred to the following Sunday.

Blessed Mary of the Divine Heart's incorrupt body is exposed for public veneration in the Church of the Sacred Heart of Jesus, in Ermesinde, in northern Portugal. The church is adjacent to the Convent of the Good Shepherd Sisters. There is also a relic of her body exposed for public veneration at the Sanctuary of Christ the King in Almada, near Lisbon, Portugal.

# Serafino Dubois

Dubois died on 15 January 1899.

# Mark Wentworth Dunham

Mark W. Dunham died in 1899, reportedly of blood poisoning after inspecting an infected hoof. His New York Times Obituary on February 12, 1899 named Dunham as “the most extensive breeder of pure-bred horses in the world… he [Dunham] collected in France a lot of mares and stallions that as a whole is conceded to be superior to any similar collection in France. He won with his horses more champion prizes in the show ring than any other breeder has ever won in the history of the show yard in America.”

After his death, the then 2000 acre Oaklawn estate was bequeathed to Dunham's son Wirth Stewart Dunham, who was 21 years old at the time and finishing law school at Harvard. Wirth Dunham married Mary Louise Ward, whose father, Dennis Ward, was the President of City National Bank. During the first World War, Wirth was a Captain in the remount section, quartermaster corps, and afterward was a major in the reserve corps. Wirth Dunham was the President of the Horse Association of America and was made a Chevalier Merite Agricole by the French Government.

In the early 20th century, farm machinery dramatically reduced the need for draft horses and Oaklawn ceased operations in 1929. The Dunham Woods Riding Club was established in 1934. Parts of the original property were listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1979.

# Paul C. Edmunds

He was interred in the family plot at St. John's Churchyard, Halifax, Virginia.

# Ignace von Ephrussi

Ephrussi died in 1899 in Vienna, Austria. His great-great-grandson, Edmund de Waal, is a British ceramicist and the author of The Hare with the Amber Eyes, a 2010 memoir about his family, including Ignace.

# Esma Sultan (daughter of Abdülaziz)

Esma Sultan died during the birth of her last child, Sultanzade Abdullah Bey, on 7 May 1899 and was buried in the mausoleum of imperial ladies at New Mosque, Eminönü, Istanbul.

# C. Washington Eves

Eves died suddenly at his home of Trelawny House, 49 Highbury New Park, London, on the 20 April 1899.  An inquest was held into the death by Dr. Danford Thomas a few days later at Holloway Road. According to evidence given, early on Thursday morning Eves went into the basement of his home to repair some electric burglar alarm bells. After he did not immediately return, Edward Moorhead, a ship-owner of Cardiff and Eves' son-in-law, went to investigate and found Eves unconscious at the bottom of the staircase with a head injury. A doctor attended but Eves died within hours from "compression of blood on the brain, coupled with concussion". A verdict of accidental death was recorded.

He was survived by his wife, son, and four daughters and was buried at Highgate Cemetery on 24 April 1899. The funeral was attended by Colonel Bird and the whole of the officers of the Victoria and St George's Rifles (1st Middlesex) who formed a guard of honour. His executors were fellow West Indian merchant Joseph Frank Alderhoven, and major James Rufus Boosé. All three were members of the Royal Colonial Institute.

# Thomas Farrer, 1st Baron Farrer

Thomas Farrer died at Abinger Hall, Dorking in 1899 and was buried at Brookwood Cemetery. He was succeeded in the title by his eldest son Thomas Cecil (1859–1940).

# Félix Faure

Faure died suddenly from apoplexy in the Élysée Palace on 16 February 1899, while engaged in sexual activities in his office with 30-year-old Marguerite Steinheil. 

It has been widely reported that Felix Faure had his fatal seizure while Steinheil was fellating him, but the exact nature of their sexual intercourse is unknown and such reports may have stemmed from various jeux de mots (puns) made up afterward by his  political opponents. One such pun was to nickname Mme Steinheil "la pompe funèbre" (wordplay in French: "pompes funèbres" means "death care business" and "pompe funèbre" could be translated, literally, as "funeral pump"). George Clemenceau's epitaph of Faure, in the same trend, was "Il voulait être César, il ne fut que Pompée" (another wordplay in French; could mean both "he wished to be Caesar, but ended up as Pompey", or "he wished to be Caesar and ended up being blown": the verb "pomper" in French is also slang for performing oral sex on a man); Clemenceau, who was also editor of the newspaper L'Aurore, wrote that "upon entering the void, he [Faure] must have felt at home". After his death, some alleged extracts from his private journals, dealing with French policy, were published in the Paris press.

# George P. Fisher

Fisher "then returned to the home of his childhood, lived quietly in his extensive library, and devoted the last years of his life to reading and literary pursuits." He died after a short illness on February 10, 1899, in Washington, D.C. He was interred in Oak Hill Cemetery in Washington, D.C. and re-interred in the Methodist Cemetery in Dover.

# Jared Bradley Flagg

Flagg had seven children, including Ernest Flagg, who became a notable architect.

Flagg died on September 25, 1899 in New York City.

# Daniel Webster Flagler

General Flagler died at the Hygeia Hotel, a resort where he had gone in an effort to recover his health after suffering from rheumatism and other ailments. He was buried at Arlington National Cemetery, Section West E, Site 147. Daniel W. Flagler and his wife are memorialized on one side of the grave marker, and General Clement Flagler and his wife are memorialized on the other. He was 63.

# Bonifaciu Florescu

Florescu eventually resigned from Saint Sava, but continued to teach history and French at Mihai Viteazul High School, at the military high school, and at the Saint Nephon seminary. His late experiments in wisdom poetry appeared in the Transylvanian Vatra. For a while director of a new magazine, Țara Literară ("The Literary Country"), he was also a contributor to Ion Livescu's Revista Theatrelor, aimed at the community of actors and theater aficionados. Livescu saw him as one of the great critics in the field, equal to Ionescu-Gion and Grigore Ventura. In 1896, with Săvescu, Florescu began translating from a history of Albanian literature (in Italian, by Alberto Straticò). By then, Florescu had published over 200 books, comprising his own works alongside translations, and had had his own verse anthologized by poet Radu D. Rosetti (in Cartea Dragosteĭ, 1896).

Before August 1899, Florescu's work was hampered by an illness, later diagnosed as ventricular hypertrophy; he was living with his family in a small house on Speranței Street, north of Colțea Hospital. Luxița Florescu died in October of that year, aged 83, and Bonifaciu only two months later, on December 18. Demetriade unexpectedly dropped by on a visit just after his friend's death, recalling: "he had woken up more joyful than ever. Always one to enjoy a pun, he asked his wife, whose name was Rose, to hand him a rose that had been left in some glass. Just after Madam Florescu handed him that flower, the soul of this man, always a poet, went out with the perfume of the rose." A brief obituary in Literatorul credited him as someone "illustrious but unhappy", who "stood up to the intellectual degeneracy into which our country was continuously pushed." He was buried in the family crypt at Țigănești Monastery, next to his mother, with a funeral ceremony attended by the Bucharest aristocracy and the Saint Sava students. The grave has since been lost during extensive repair work on the monastery grounds.

Florescu was survived by both his wife and his son. In 1900, Henriette-Rose took a small pension from the state, awarded to her by a review committee which included Costache Bălcescu. She lived for 28 more years, to January 1928. Ion, an officer in the Romanian Land Forces, married in February 1910 Elena Kalinderu, a relative of agriculturist and art collector Ioan Kalinderu. He had two children of his own: Mircea Ioan (born 1912, killed in a car accident in 1929), and judge Ion "Nelu" Florescu, who emigrated to Brazil and was still alive in 1941.

Bonifaciu Florescu's work and family history gained more exposure after the August 1944 coup and during early Romanian communism, when left-wing ideologies turned Bălcescu into their hero. At the time, Potra notes, the Florescus came to accept Bonifaciu's paternity, published secret notes and rare photographs, and even helped Camil Petrescu write his romanticized biography of the revolutionary. In the 1950s, Soviet historiography proposed that Florescu was secretly a Communard, and that he supported Sergey Nechayev, the Russian revolutionist, providing him with his own passport. The claim was reviewed with skepticism by the Romanian scholar Georges Haupt, who noted that "Florescu" was actually a certain N. F. Melediu. As noted in the 1980s by Potra, the real Florescu had been causally forgotten, despite being both Bălcescu's heir and, on his own, "a distinguished scholar, a true encyclopédiste."

# Hezekiah William Foote

Foote died on January 29, 1899 in Macon, Mississippi, where he was buried. His great-grandson was Shelby Foote, the Civil War author.

# Cassius Gaius Foster

Foster died on June 21, 1899, in Topeka, Kansas.

# James Patrick Fox

James died at the age of 38 of a massive heart attack at his St. John's home on February 27, 1899. He was manager of the Prince of Wale's Rink and had just returned home after helping prepare the ice for a planned hockey match that evening. At the time of his death, he left to mourn his wife Isabel and four children under fifteen.

# Christian Friele

Friele was twice in his life offered a knighthood of the Order of St. Olav; he rejected both offers. The first time he turned down the offer with the words: "Editor of the Royal Norwegian Morgenbladet, what? No safer way to compromise the position of the paper and its editor!"; the second with the words: "Would your Majesty force me to leave the country?".

He died on 24 January 1899 in Kristiania and was buried in Vår Frelsers gravlund together with his wife. Friele occurs rather frequently in the contemporary literature: Ibsen's character Daniel Heire has acquired some properties from Friele; Knut Hamsun describes him briefly in Hunger; in Alexander Kielland's Arbeidsfolk he receives contemptuous treatment; and Bjørnson wrote a play titled Redaktøren ("the Editor") in which Friele is the protagonist. The conservative politician C. J. Hambro described him thus:

Men with greater names and with higher status in history are forgotten and will remain so. Christian Friele will be remembered; the memory and the myth have glossed his name and mitigated the sharp echo it once had. He is the first man in Norwegian history who will be remembered for being a journalist.

# Francis Furman

Furman died in 1899. He was buried in the Mount Olivet Cemetery in Nashville, where his tomb was designed by Danish-born sculptor Johannes Gelert (1852-1923). It is the largest tomb in the cemetery.

Furman Hall on the campus of Vanderbilt University in Nashville is named in his honor. It was the result of a US$100,000 donation by his widow after his death, even though he never attended the university. Inside the building, there is a sculpture of Francis Furman. From 1907 to 1967, it housed the Chemistry and Physics Department. Since 1967, it has been home to the Humanities Department.

# Gan Eng Seng

On 9 September 1899, Gan died at the age of 55 in his house at No. 87 Amoy Street. His total assets were worth an estimated S$550,000. He was buried at Leng Kee Sua somewhere on the hill by the side where Leng Kee Road runs today. Due to redevelopment of the area, his body was disinterred and reburied in a family grave at Bukit Brown Cemetery. After the death of his father, Gan Tiang Tok continued the family business for three years, though by the turn of century it was no longer so lucrative. Gan Tiang Tok was dogged by ill health from 1903 until his death in 1927 at the age of 68.

# Augustus Hill Garland

President Cleveland lost reelection to Benjamin Harrison in the 1888 election and Garland left office at the end of Cleveland's term in 1889. He resumed practicing law in Washington, D.C. and published a number of books, including The Constitution As It Is (1880), Experience in the Supreme Court of the United States, with Some Reflections and Suggestions as to that Tribunal (1883), Third-Term Presidential (1896), Experience in the Supreme Court of the United States (1898) and  Treatise on the Constitution and Jurisdiction of the United States Courts (1898). On January 26, 1899, while arguing a case before the Supreme Court, Garland suffered a stroke and died a few hours later in the Capitol. He was interred at Mount Holly Cemetery in Little Rock, Arkansas.

# Grand Duke George Alexandrovich of Russia

 George died suddenly in Abastumani, on 9 August 1899, at the age of 28. He had been out alone on his motorcycle and some hours later, when he failed to return, his worried staff sent out a search party. By the time they found him it was too late. A peasant woman had discovered him collapsed at the side of the road, blood oozing from his mouth as he struggled to breathe. She supported him in her arms until he died.

The news reached Nicholas by telegram and he had the difficult task of telling his mother. She broke down and wept. He had seldom been out of her thoughts for the last few years and his death came as a terrible shock. His family were completely devastated. Nicholas was especially grief-stricken at losing his younger brother and childhood playmate. Grand Duke Konstantin Konstantinovich wrote, "Everyone was struck, as if by lightning, by this sad and unexpected news. Queen Victoria wrote to Nicholas II, "Pray accept the expression of my sincerest sympathy in this great sorrow, for I know the affection you had for your poor brother Georgy, whose life was so sad and lonely." The Dowager Empress telegraphed Queen Victoria, "Thank you so much for kind sympathy in this terrible sudden bereavement... My poor dearest son died quite alone. Am heartbroken."

On 14 August 1899, he was laid to rest in the St. Peter and Paul Cathedral in Saint Petersburg, not far from his late father, Alexander III. During the service, his mother stood without tears, only deep suffering was imprinted on her face. When the coffin was put down into the tomb, Maria Feodorovna stood next to Xenia, holding her arm-in-arm and suddenly, looking at her daughter with widely open, unseeing eyes, she loudly said, "Let's go home. Let's go home, I cannot stand it anymore!" and she rushed out. When a board was laid down for leaving the tomb, she went away so quickly that it was difficult for others to keep pace with her. Nobody even had enough time to throw flowers on to the tomb. In the carriage she sobbed for a long time, pressing to her breast George's hat that she took off the coffin's cover.

# Louis de Goesbriand

Bishop de Goesbriand later died at St. Joseph's Orphan Home age 83, as the oldest bishop in the United States. He is buried at Resurrection Park in South Burlington.

# Bridget Goodwin

She died at Reefton on 19 October 1899. Her age at death was variously given as 72, 86 and 96 years.

# Albert Grant (company promoter)

Grant spent his last years in relative poverty. He died of heart failure at Aldwick Place, Pagham, near Bognor, in Sussex in August 1899 aged 67.

# William Laury Greene

After Congress adjourned in March 1899, Greene traveled to Lincoln, Nebraska to observe the legislative election for U.S. Senator.  On March 10, he traveled from Lincoln to Omaha on business.  On March 11, Greene and several friends traveled from his Omaha hotel to the train station by carriage, and upon arrival at the station, his friends observed that he was laying down on the back seat.  They were unable to revive him, so they carried him into the train station and summoned medical aid.  A doctor soon arrived, who determined that Greene had died, and the cause of death was heart failure.

Greene's funeral took place at First Baptist Church in Kearney.  He was interred in Kearney Cemetery.

# Laurence Gronlund

Laurence Gronlund died October 15, 1899, in New York City. He was 53 years old at the time of his death.

At the time of his death Gronlund was remembered critically but warmly in the American socialist press. Writing in the Social Democratic Herald, Secretary of the Social Democratic Party of America Seymour Stedman remembered him as a proverbial absent-minded professor:

He was eccentric and careless. He would walk with pipe and paper along a thriving thoroughfare oblivious of all; his hat shaped like a French general's, peak in front and back; shoes well worn; clothes shabby, and was in meeting reticent, even timid ... He treated the subject of Socialism plainly and stripped it of utopianism. ... The peoples of the future will dwell in peace where this hardy pioneer warred with the accumulated prejudice, passions, and ignorance of the ages.
Leonard D. Abbott recalled Gronlund as a "great soul" who had lived in poverty throughout his life out of commitment to the socialist cause, the recipient of "very small financial rewards from all his books put together." He quoted Gronlund during his last year of life as rejecting the political strategy of winning power through independent political action, declaring "I regard [Eugene] Debs as the most unselfish of labor leaders, but you can't build up a third party in this county – you've got to work through the Democratic Party."

Gronlund was enormously influential during the decades of the 1880s and 1890s and is credited by historian Daniel Bell with playing a pivotal role in the conversion of future Appeal to Reason publisher Julius Wayland to socialism in 1891. Wayland would begin his first socialist newspaper, The Coming Nation, in 1893 and would build his subsequent publication into a mass circulation weekly that would help make socialism a broad political movement during the first two decades of the 20th century.

Gronlund's articulation of a vision for a cooperative economy and society echoed over the next decades in early-twentieth century U.S. and Canadian leftist circles. It helped lead to the formation of the Co-operative Commonwealth Federation party in 1932, which became Canada's largest left-wing political party, and continues to this day as the New Democratic Party, and to the nature of the economic principles of the Farmer-Labor Party of the United States, particularly in the FLP's Minnesota affiliate, where advocacy for a Cooperative Commonwealth formed the central theme of the Party's platform from 1934, until the Minnesota FLP merged with the state Democratic Party to form the Democratic–Farmer–Labor Party in 1944.

# Charles Guillou

Guilloû died on January 2, 1899 in New York of pneumonia.

He wrote a book of his reminiscences (never published), and took many sketches during his travels.

His sketches of Oregon and California were published in 1961.

Grandson Charles Thomas Blackmore was born July 3, 1888, joined the British army in World War I, and died on June 16, 1915 in the Battle of Bellewaarde. His widow donated Guilloû's papers to the College of Physicians of Philadelphia in 1974.
Some of his effects such as medals are on display at the museum there.

Grandson Philip Guillou Blackmore was born January 18, 1890 in Virginia and entered the Virginia Military Institute in 1908.

After graduating, he was commissioned into the coast artillery of the US Army on December 20, 1911. During World War I he also went to Hawaii, where he served at Fort Kamehameha and rose to be commander of Fort Ruger. During World War II he rose to the rank of temporary brigadier general. In August 1947 he assumed command of the White Sands Proving Ground. He married Emily Van Patten and had four children.[citation needed]

He retired in 1950 and died April 7, 1974.

# John Haldeman

On September 7, 1887, Haldeman married Anna Buchanan, who was the great-great-granddaughter of Kentucky pioneer William Whitley. The couple had three daughters: Jean Bruce (Haldeman) Wendling, Bessie Avery Haldeman, and Isabel Brown Haldeman. Haldeman died in Louisville, Kentucky on September 17, 1899 and was buried in Louisville's Cave Hill Cemetery.

# Mary C. F. Hall-Wood

Hall-Wood had been an invalid for several years before she died in Santa Barbara, December 14, 1899, of hemorrhage of the stomach at the age of 57 years.

# Nathaniel Job Hammond

Hammond married Laura Lewis in 1858. After his election defeat in 1886 he resumed his career as a lawyer. He died in Atlanta on April 20, 1899 and was buried in that city's Oakland Cemetery.

# Richard Mason Hancock

Mason's work gave him considerable respect and wealth. He was an active republican and vice-president of the Provident Hospital and Training School for African-Americans in Chicago
Mason was a freemason and a member of St. Thomas' Episcopal Church. He died June 5, 1899 in Chicago of stomach cancer and his funeral was at St. Thomas' Episcopal Church.

# Broughton Harris

Broughton Harris died in Brattleboro on January 19, 1899.  He was buried in Brattleboro's Prospect Hill Cemetery.

# John T. Harris

He died in Harrisonburg, Virginia on October 14, 1899 and was interred there in Woodbine Cemetery. His papers are held in the special collections division of the James Madison University library.

# John Heron-Maxwell

Heron-Maxwell married Marguerite Stancomb, daughter of William Stancomb of Blount's Court, Wiltshire in 1868. Heron-Maxwell died at the age of 62.

# Farrer Herschell, 1st Baron Herschell

In February 1899, while the commission was in full swing, Herchell slipped in the street and fractured his pelvis. His constitution, which at one time was a robust one, had been undermined by constant hard work, and proved unequal to sustaining the shock. On 1 March, only two weeks after the accident, he died at the Shoreham Hotel, Washington, a post-mortem examination revealing heart disease. John Hay, United States Secretary of State, at once telegraphed to Joseph Hodges Choate, the United States Ambassador to the United Kingdom, the deep sorrow felt by President William McKinley. Sir Wilfrid Laurier said the next day, in the parliament chamber at Ottawa, that he regarded Herschell's death as a misfortune to Canada and to the British Empire.

A funeral service held in St John's Episcopal Church, Washington, was attended by the president and vice-president of the United States, by the cabinet ministers, the judges of the Supreme Court, the members of the joint high commission, and a large number of senators and other representative men. The body was brought to London in a British man-of-war, and a second funeral service was held in Westminster Abbey before it was conveyed to its final resting-place at Tincleton, Dorset, in the parish church where he had been married.

# Samuel G. Hilborn

He lived in retirement until his death in Washington, D.C., April 19, 1899.
He was interred in Rock Creek Cemetery.

# Orrin E. Hine

Hine died in Vienna, Fairfax County, Virginia on September 19, 1899, and was buried at Arlington National Cemetery. In 1908, his widow was granted a pension based on his service His son, Spanish–American War veteran, lawyer and railroadman Col. Charles DeLano Hine is buried near them both.

# Garret Hobart

By late 1898, Hobart had fallen ill with a serious heart ailment, which he at first concealed from the public.  He continued Senate duty, but nearly collapsed after delivering an address closing the session.  He accompanied the President on a vacation trip to Hanna's winter home in Thomasville, Georgia, but quickly contracted the flu and returned to Washington.  By April 1899, Hobart's illness was well known in the press, though Hanna assured the newspapers that Hobart would be on the ticket in 1900:  "nothing but death or an earthquake can stop the re-nomination of Vice President Hobart".  Hobart rented a home in his birthplace of Long Branch, then an upscale Jersey Shore resort.  Doctors prescribed complete rest, and the Vice President amused himself by feeding two pet fish, a gold one named McKinley and a silver one named Bryan.

Despite his vice president's ill health, McKinley called upon him to break the news to Secretary of War Russell Alger that McKinley wanted him to resign—the secretary had ignored or misunderstood repeated hints from the President.  According to McKinley biographer Margaret Leech, "The President did not show his usual hypersensitive regard for other people's feelings in handing over to a sick man a disagreeable task which it was his own duty to perform."  Hobart invited Alger to Long Branch for the weekend, and broke the news; Alger duly submitted his resignation to McKinley.  Hobart's condition worsened within days of the Alger visit, and he was soon bedridden.  The New York Sun attributed Alger's resignation to Hobart's "crystal insight" and "velvet tact"; after which Hobart wrote to McKinley, "My 'crystal insight' is still clear, but the nap is slightly worn off my velvet tact".

After a vacation with the McKinleys on Lake Champlain, Hobart returned to Paterson in September.  On November 1, 1899, the government announced that Hobart would not return to public life.  His condition deteriorated rapidly, and he died on November 21, 1899, at age 55.  President McKinley told the family, "No one outside of this home feels this loss more deeply than I do."

New Jersey Governor Foster Voorhees ordered that state buildings be draped in mourning for 30 days, and that flags be flown at half staff until Hobart's funeral.  Hobart's home, Carroll Hall, was opened to the public for four hours so that citizens might pass by his open casket; 12,000 people did so.  Hobart was laid to rest at Cedar Lawn Cemetery in Paterson after a large public funeral, attended by President McKinley and many high government officials.  Although the large government delegation meant that few local people could attend the service, a crowd of 50,000 came to Paterson to honor Hobart.

The mausoleum over the grave was erected in 1901. His wife purchased eleven plots adjoining the family plot to accommodate the structure. The building has massive marble columns in the front with a heavy metal door; on the back above the sarcophagus is a stained glass window. There are two sarcophagi in the center of the building, for Garret Hobart and his wife. Around the tomb are niches for other members of the family. At the time of construction in 1901, the mausoleum cost about $80,000.

# Suzanne Hoschedé

After a lingering illness, Suzanne Hoschedé died on September 6, 1899.[nb 3] Marthe Hoschedé, Suzanne’s youngest sister, helped Butler raise Jimmy and Lilly.

# Robertson Howard

Howard died suddenly at age 52 on December 1, 1899. His body was taken back to Washington, D.C. for burial in the Congressional Cemetery. His grave was unmarked for years  until his Pi Kappa Alpha fraternity furnished a bronze plaque in his memory.

# Charles McEwen Hyde

He became interested in the Christian ministry in Europe and  Asia. In 1893, Rev. and Mrs. Hyde toured Europe, and in 1897 they toured Japan and China.

Hyde died October 13, 1899. His funeral was held at the Central Union Church in Honolulu.

# Hedworth Jolliffe, 2nd Baron Hylton

He died in October 1899, aged 70, and was succeeded in his titles by his surviving son Hylton George Hylton Jolliffe.

# Thomas Henry Ismay

Shortly after the launching of the Oceanic on 14 January 1899, Thomas Henry Ismay began to complain of pains in his chest. Throughout his life he had been very active and was seldom sick, so his doctor took his pains very seriously. His condition slowly deteriorated and construction on Oceanic's sister ships was delayed. In March of that year, Thomas's health began to improve, and he and Margaret went to Windermere where he became sick again. Mrs Margaret summoned a doctor and a dose of morphine was given to Ismay. After 6 days he was feeling better and he returned to Dawpool in Thurstaston, Wirral. Within 6 weeks he had more violent pain. The doctor diagnosed it as a gallstone. By 26 April Ismay felt good enough to work, but in August he collapsed and was confined to bed. On 31 August an operation was performed on Ismay to try to alleviate his condition. The operation was unsuccessful and a second one became necessary on 4 September. The next morning he insisted that his daughters go on a voyage on the Oceanic whilst he talked to his wife. He asked his wife to arrange for the local church to pray for him. On 14 September Thomas suffered a heart attack. His condition continued to worsen and on 23 November Thomas Henry Ismay died at the age of 62. His wife never fully recovered and she died 7 years later.

He and his wife are commemorated with a large grave at St Bartholomew's Church, Thurstaston, Wirral, inscribed: "Great thoughts, great feelings came to him like instincts unawares" and "Blessed are the pure in heart for they shall see God."

# Charles Pinckney James

James died on August 9, 1899, in Leesburg, Virginia.

# Michael Jebsen

During the late summer of 1899, while visiting a spa resort, Michael Jebsen was taken ill.   He was transferred to Berlin where he underwent an operation and, on 30 September, died.   Two months later, in a ceremony that was very much quieter than must have been envisaged on 28 May 1899 when he couple announced their engagement, his daughter Joanne married her cousin, Heinrich Jessen, consolidating family connections that underpinned the Hong Kong-based Jebsen Group.

# John Joyce (New Zealand politician)

Joyce died suddenly on 1 December 1899. He was in the midst of the 1899 general election campaign when he started to have heart problems. He saw a doctor in the morning, was prescribed rest, and died in the early evening during his sleep.

His funeral was described as one of the largest ever in the colony, and was attended by several thousand people. Due to his previous involvement with the Canterbury volunteer forces, he was given a full military funeral. The railways estimated that they transported 400 soldiers and about 2500 others to Lyttelton to the funeral.

Joyce was married in 1864 to a daughter of Mr. G. Coates (a jeweller from Christchurch), and he was survived by his wife, four sons and six daughters. Joyce Street in Lyttelton is named after him.

# George Washington Julian

Julian died on July 7, 1899, in Irvington. His remains are interred at Crown Hill Cemetery in Indianapolis, Indiana.

While representing Indiana's citizens in the U.S. Congress, Julian became known for his strong character and for his antislavery agitation during the American Civil War and Reconstruction era. Less known were his interests in land reform and women's suffrage. An obituary published at the time of Julian's death described the radical politician as a "doctrinaire rather than a statesman" and remembered him as an "eloquent speaker," a "forceful writer", and a "powerful champion" of the causes he favored. Julian was also characterized as an "impatient," "arrogant," and "self-righteous" reformer who was hardworking and remained steadfast in his beliefs.  

Indianapolis Public School Number 57 was named in Julian's honor.

# Kaʻiulani

In 1898, while on a horse ride in the mountains of Hawaii Island, Kaʻiulani was caught in a storm and came down with a fever and pneumonia. Earlier she had caught cold from swimming while on the Big Island, and this worsened matters.  Kaʻiulani was brought back to Oahu where her health continued to decline. She died on March 6, 1899 at the age of 23 of inflammatory rheumatism.  She was interred in Honolulu's Royal Mausoleum of Hawaii.

# Queen Kapiolani

After  the overthrow of the Kingdom of Hawai`i's government and her eviction from ʻIolani Palace, Queen Kapiʻolani retired to her private residence Pualeilani in Waikīkī, dying there June 24, 1899 at age sixty-four. She was interred in the Royal Mausoleum of Hawaii along with her husband and the rest of the House of Kalākaua.

# Katsu Kaishū

In 1891, through a connection of Tsuda Sen, the father of Tsuda Ume,  Katsu Yasuyoshi purchased a plot of land at Senzoku-ike kôen (洗足池, Senzoku Pond), and built his retirement home there. Following his death in 1899, he was buried with his wife Tami near the site of their home, on the shores of Senzoku Pond, in what is today Senzoku-ike kôen (洗足池公園, Senzoku Pond Public Park) in Tokyo.

# Heinrich Kiepert

He died in Berlin on April 21, 1899. His son, cartographer Richard Kiepert published remaining works by Kiepert after his death, including a map of Asia Minor in 24 sheets on a scale of 1:400,000 in 1902. He also managed the reissuing of Formae orbis antiqui. Kiepert Island is named after Kiepert.

# Heinrich Kirchweger

Kirchweger died at the age of 89 in Hanover, Germany. His grave is located in the Engesohde town cemetery.

# Isabel Larrañaga Ramírez

In 1894 Mother Isabel sent a religious expedition to Cuba in spite of the delicate political situation during that time. During her second trip to Cuba, she suffered from heart problems which were aggravated with sufferings from the war, which eventually led to her death on January 17, 1899. She left a flourishing institute that, after her death, has extended on the following nations: Puerto Rico, Venezuela, Peru, and Chile.

# Patrick James Leonard

Leonard died on January 1, 1899 and was buried in Saint Joseph Cemetery, New Almelo, Kansas.

# Henry Hayes Lockwood

General Lockwood died in Washington D.C.'s Georgetown neighborhood in 1899, five years after his wife and six years after James's remains were returned and buried at Oak Hill Cemetery in Washington D.C. General Lockwood was survived by six daughters and his younger son Henry. His remains and those of his wife are buried at the U.S. Naval Academy Cemetery in Annapolis, Maryland.

# Jimmy Logue

Jimmy died penniless of oedema of the lungs on October 4, 1899 in the Philadelphia County almshouse, and was buried in the cemetery of Church of St. James the Less along with his beloved wife Joanna. He'd given up robbery and repented his sins, though he never forgave his stepson and nephew for Joanna's murder.

# John Lord Love

Died in San Francisco in 1899.

# Robert Lowry (hymn writer)

In 1880 Lowry took a break from his pastoral duties at Plainfield and visited Europe. His health at this time was deteriorating, and he suffered from increasing deafness. In 1885, feeling the need for a longer rest, he resigned his ministry. After travels in the south and west of the country, and in Mexico, he returned to Plainfield much refreshed, and resumed his pastoral work.

Lowry was a member  of the Phi Kappa Psi fraternity, and in 1888 was invested as its national president for a two-year term, in succession to Governor Joseph B. Foraker.  In 1890 his wife Anna died; two years later Lowry married Mary Jane Runyon. In 1894 he provided a memorial hymn to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the Lewisburg Baptist church. Lowry continued to live and work in Plainfield until his death, on November 25, 1899. He was buried at Hillside Cemetery in Plainfield. 
The eulogist summarized Lowry's life and work thus: "His melodies and songs were but the expression of the man’s heart and his character, and they attracted all to him".

# H. L. Mackenzie

Mackenzie died while in Swatow on December 26, 1899. He was survived by his four children, though his wife had died several years earlier. Mackenzie was admired for his willingness to venture away from the center of the mission and out into surrounding areas, where he would provide medical assistance and spread the gospel to previously overlooked communities. Mackenzie persevered in his missionary work in spite of the absence of three of his children, who remained in Scotland, and the death of his wife, who passed away while accompanying Mackenzie at the Swatow mission. Mackenzie laid the groundwork for the continued development of the Swatow mission after his death, with an Anglo-Chinese college being constructed in 1905–06. His founding of the Taiwan Mission and translation of the scriptures into Swatow dialect were also accomplishments that would have a meaningful impact on future generations of Chinese.

# Thomas Maddock

Maddock retired when he was 65 years old in 1883. He died in New Jersey on June 16, 1899. There is a Will recorded in the New York Surrogate's Court records "Vol 441–444, 1890–1891" in New York County in the state of New York (USA).

# Princess Marie Louise of Bourbon-Parma

Disillusionment in her private life and bearing four children in five years affected her frail health. Suffering from pneumonia, Marie Louise died in Sofia, twenty four hours after giving birth to her fourth child. Aged just 29, she was buried in the Roman Catholic Cathedral of St Louis of France in Plovdiv, Bulgaria.[citation needed]

# Frances Anne Spencer-Churchill, Duchess of Marlborough

Frances died at Blenheim on 16 April 1899, the day after her 77th birthday, having outlived five of her eleven children. She was buried on 21 April 1899 in the family vault beneath Blenheim Chapel. Her grandson Sir Winston Churchill wrote of her: "She was a woman of exceptional capacity, energy and decision".

# William V. Marquis

His wife, Annie, died in August 1868.

# Florence Marryat

Marryat became active in the Society of Authors, founded in 1884, and also began to breed bulldogs and terriers. Over the last 14 years of her life, she had a relationship with a younger actor, Herbert McPherson, who inherited half of her estate. During the 1890s, she ran a school of Journalism and Literary Art. She continued writing for the rest of her life, and some of her best known books were her late-career writings on spiritualism, and included There Is No Death (1891), The Spirit World (1894) and A Soul on Fire. She influenced wiccan Gerald Gardner in his youth.

Marryat died in 1899 from diabetes and pneumonia and is buried in Kensal Green Cemetery in London.

# Othniel Charles Marsh

Marsh died on March 18, 1899, a few years after his great rival Cope. He was interred at the Grove Street Cemetery in New Haven, Connecticut.

# Jose Mascarel

Mascarel was born in Marseilles or Menton, France, on April 18, 1816. He died of heart failure on October 6, 1899, at the age of 83 in his home at 615 Ducommun Street in Los Angeles. A solemn high mass was scheduled for the Old Plaza Church, with interment following at the Catholic Calvary Cemetery in East Los Angeles. He was at his death the "[second-]oldest foreigner in Los Angeles, if not in California," after Elijah Moulton.

# Francis Blackwell Mayer

Mayer did not take a wife until he was 55 years old, when on February 12, 1883, he married the 27-year-old widow Ellen (or Ella) Benton Brewer.  Mayer did not mention any children in his last will and testament of 1896, nor were there any children living at the time of Mayer's death in Annapolis on July 28, 1899.  Mayer's body was interred at the Annapolis City Cemetery.

# Thomas McDonnell

Thomas McDonnell died on 8 November 1899.

# Edward McGarry (Wisconsin politician)

He died May 17, 1899 in Milwaukee.

# Lambdin P. Milligan

Milligan died of natural causes at his son's home in Huntington County, Indiana, on December 21, 1899, thirty-three years after the U.S. Supreme Court ruling in the case that bore his name.

Ex parte Milligan became well known as the leading U.S. Supreme Court case that found the president went beyond his legal powers to suppress dissenters during the American Civil War. The decision also helped to establish the tradition that presidential and military action "based on war" had limits.

# Thomas T. Minor

He died, along with his friend George Morris Haller, and Haller’s brother-in-law Lewis Cox, on or about December 2, 1889, apparently when their canoe overturned in Saratoga Passage near Camano Island. Minor's body was never recovered. The city of Seattle held a memorial service and a procession on Sunday, December 15, 1899.

# Zahir Shah Mirza

In the early 1870s, in neighboring estates in Natore, he provided support to the local governors and zamindars in crushing the Pabna revolts by the peasantry. In Pabna, he was a patron and participant in the Chalanbeel Horse Races. After his death in 1899, the estates of the family was expanded by his son and grandsons to become one of the few Muslim zamindars in the area. After the abolition of the lord-peasant system in 1950, members of the family held important positions in the regional politics and local governance.

His son Mirza Zafar succeeded him as the Zamindar. His office of the Mridha went to younger sons who dominated politics in Rajshahi and Natore well into the twenty first century, such as Ibrahim Ali Mridha and others.

# Romesh Chandra Mitra

Mitter offered his resignation in 1889 and he formally retired from the court on 1 January 1890. He had been late to an appointment at court, having forgotten about it, and believed that his mistake was unfitting for his position. He was knighted in June 1890 and died on 13 July 1899.[citation needed]

# Antonio E. Molina

Molina died in Ponce on 21 August 1899 and was interred at Cementerio Civil de Ponce.

# Thomas Moonlight

Moonlight died on February 7, 1899, and is buried in Mount Muncie Cemetery in Fort Leavenworth, Kansas. Moonlight's wife is buried in the same cemetery.

# John Godfrey Moore

Moore died suddenly in New York City in 1899, leaving a large estate. His partner Schley carried on the business after Moore's death.

Moore married twice. He had two daughters -- Ruth and Faith -- with his first wife, Miriam Jane Aldrich (1853-1890), of Munson, Massachusetts, whom he married in 1872. Ruth married Arthur Lee, a British military officer, later in 1899, just after her father's death. The couple had met in Kingston, Ontario, where Lee was a professor at the Royal Military College of Canada. With her inheritance, Lee was able to retire from the military in his early 30s, and start a very successful political career in Britain, being elected to the House of Commons in 1900. The couple later donated their country estate -- Chequers -- in 1917 to the British government for use in perpetuity by successive prime ministers. Lee became Viscount Lee of Fareham, a member of the House of Lords, and Ruth became a Viscountess until her death in 1965; the couple had no children. Faith Moore also moved to Britain, dying there in 1944.

Moore had a son with his second wife, Louise Taylor Hartshorne (June 6, 1867 -- February 10, 1923) of New York City, whom he married in 1894. She was the daughter of James Mott Hartshorne, also a Wall Street financier, who had founded his own firm James M. Hartshorne and Brother in 1863.

# Robert J. Morgan

Morgan died on July 23, 1899 in Aberdeen, Mississippi. He was buried at Elmwood Cemetery in Memphis, Tennessee.

# Muhammad Sharif (Kalifa)

After the Battle of Omdurman (2 September 1898) in which the Mahdist forces were defeated by an Anglo-Egyptian force led by General Herbert Kitchener, Khalifa Sherif surrendered to the British.
Muhammad Sharif was placed under house arrest in the village of Shakaba near Wad Madani with two of the Mahdi's sons.
In 1899, hearing that they planned to join the Khalifa (who was still at large), the three were arrested.
There was a skirmish when an attempt was made to rescue them. Sherif and the Mahdi's two sons were found guilty by a court martial trial and were shot.
A different version of what happened is that the government heard a rumor that the group was conducting Mahdist propaganda. A force of government troops was dispatched which fired on the group at random, killing Khalifa Muhammad Sharif and two of the Mahdi's sons, al-Fadil and al-Bushra. A third son, Abd al-Rahman al-Mahdi, was badly wounded.

One of Muhammad Sharif's wives was the Sharifa Zainab bint al-Mahdi, daughter of the Mahdi, and their son Husain al-Khalifa Muhammad Sharif (1888–1928) was a pioneer journalist in the Anglo-Egyptian Sudan.

# Abdallahi ibn Muhammad

Following the loss of Dongola in September 1896, then Berber and Abu Hamed to Kitchener's army in 1897, the Khalifa Abdullah sent an army that was defeated at the Battle of Atbara River on April 8, 1898, afterwards falling back to his new capital of Omdurman.

At the Battle of Omdurman on September 2, 1898, his army of 52,000 men was destroyed. The Khalifa then fled south and went into hiding with a few followers but was finally caught and killed by Sir Reginald Wingate's Egyptian column at Umm Diwaikarat in Kordofan on November 25, 1899.

Devout, intelligent, and an able general and administrator, the Khalifa was unable to overcome tribal dissension to unify Sudan, and was forced to employ Egyptians to provide the trained administrators and technicians he needed to maintain his self-proclaimed Islamist military caliphate.

# Durga Charan Nag

Nag Mahasaya died in 1899 in a condition of abject poverty and indebtedness. Sarat Chandra Chakravarty who witnessed his death mentions that even in his death bed it was his prime concern to serve his guests who came to see him and to talk about Sri Ramakrishna. Swami Saradananda, a leading monk of Ramakrishna Order and a brother disciple who at this time was in Dacca also came to see him. Apparently Nag Mahasaya also selected the precise date and time of his departure.

The last moments of his life are documented in the book "Life of Nag Mahasaya" by Sarat Chandra Chakravarty and can be read in detail in the following website - Life of Nag Mahasaya - link is spam

His last words were, "Grace, grace, grace out of Thine own boundless mercy."

After his death a photograph was taken of his body which is now reproduced in all writings related to him.

# Daniel O'Connell (journalist)

O'Connell died suddenly in 1899 from a cold that turned into pneumonia. The New York Times published an obituary and printed a quatrain by the Australian poet Adam Lindsay Gordon incorrectly stating that it was one of O'Connell's:

In 1900, Ina Coolbrith, Bohemian Club librarian, edited a collection of O'Connell's poetry, entitled Songs from Bohemia, copyrighted to Mabel Ashley O'Connell. Coolbrith ended the book with "The Chamber of Sleep", the last poem by O'Connell, written ten days before his death. William Greer Harrison wrote in a memorial foreword that O'Connell was an avid outdoorsman of eternally sunny disposition. He mentioned his appreciation for good food and his fine chef's skill in delicate cookery. Harrison wrote of his flair for swordsmanship and his pleasure in fishing, and noted that during any of these activities, O'Connell could be seen pausing to write down on a scrap of paper an idea for a story.

Mabel Ashley O'Connell died of grief a year after her husband. Harrison wrote that she "lingered here only long enough to say farewell to her many friends, and then joined her husband in the land that is hidden from material eyes, where love and life are one."

Charles Rollo Peters (1862-1928), the San Franciscan painter, a very close friend of his, designed two memorials for him, the memorial seat at Sausalito
and a further one, located somewhere in the Marin hills. This memorial consists of a bronze tablet affixed to an oak tree bearing the words “In loving memory of Daniel O ’ Connell, poet, philosopher, friend.” In an interview Rollo said:

“There was a fitting celebration. Porter Ashe, Ned Hamilton and others recalled the good old days when “The Roseleaves ” fluttered about in madcap merriment.  And then the tablet was left to Mother Nature and to the silence which is only broken by the soughing of the breeze through the branches and the music of the bee and the katydid . Only the wanderer in the hills or the devout pilgrim seeking out shrines of song will find the tablet on the oak. “Dan O ’Connell loved God ’s out-of-doors, ” said Peters when I asked him about the memorial . “He delighted in life in the open . He was an excellent shot, a skilled fly fisher and an expert yachtsman . So it seemed right to commemorate him in the hills and among the trees.”

# Eugene O'Growney

In 1894, failing health caused him to go to Arizona and California, where he died. Some years after, with the aid of Irish sympathisers in the United States, his body was brought back to Ireland

His funeral, held on 26 September 1903 at the Catholic Pro-Cathedral, Dublin, was attended by 6,000 people, including members of the trade guilds, clerics, politicians, members of the nationalist Gaelic Athletic Association and students. 

He is buried in the cemetery attached to St. Patrick's College, Maynooth.

# William O'Hara

O'Hara died after a long illness in Scranton, aged 82.  He is buried under the main altar of St. Peter's Cathedral.

# German Opačić

After a short illness, Opačić died in Vienna in January 1899. He was buried in Plato's chapel at the Almaš Cemetery in Novi Sad, Austria-Hungary (present-day Serbia).

# Elias Owen (priest)

Owen died on 19 May 1899, aged 65; he was at work in his smoking room at Llanyblodwel on The Holy Wells of North Wales when he collapsed; by the time a doctor had arrived, he had died without regaining consciousness. At the inquest, the cause of death was found to be a cerebral haemorrhage, or "apoplexy", probably a stroke.


Owen is commemorated in the church of St. Michael the Archangel at Llanyblodwel with a stained glass window of the Good Shepherd and St Michael; underneath the window is a brass plaque with the inscription:
To the glory of God and in memory of Elias Owen MA, FSA, vicar of this parish 1892–98, Diocesan Inspector of Schools 1876–1892, author of The Old Stone Crosses of the Vale of Clwyd and Welsh Folk Lore &c. This window and tablet are dedicated by his many friends in this diocese.
 His gravestone bears the inscription: "We all do fade as a leaf".(Isaiah 64:6)

# Jules Pastré

He died May 21, 1899, in Paris, 51 avenue Montaigne (8e).

# Frank Pearson

On 22 December 1899, Pearson died after accidentally swallowing cyanide. He was drunk and mistook it for his medicine. He is buried in Karrakatta Cemetery Western Australia.

# Francis Harrison Pierpont

He died at his daughter's home in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania on March 24, 1899. Three years later, his remains were relocated to Woodlawn Cemetery in Fairmont, West Virginia.  They reside next to those of his wife Julia and three of their four children.

A monument to Francis Pierpont was installed in Wheeling on West Virginia Day in 2015.

# Gregorio del Pilar

On November 1899, Aguinaldo's party had reached the town of Concepción and climbed the peak of Mount Tirad. Del Pilar ordered three lines of trenches be dug up on the pass and had the "pick of all the men that can be spared" on orders from Aguinaldo. While Aguinaldo and the rest were in Cervantes, Ilocos Sur, Del Pilar rode to the rearguard to ensure the safety of the retreat. Word had come that the Americans were advancing on Tirad Pass in an effort to cut off Aguinaldo from the Tinio Brigade situated on the Abra River.

The U.S. Army 33rd Infantry Regiment, under Major Peyton C. March took Concepción on December 1 and began to scale Tirad Pass the next day. Although they had difficulty in attacking the Filipino position, they saw an opening with the aid of a Tingguian Igorot named Januario Galut. The Americans then devised a plan to flank the entrenched defenders from the village of Lingay at the foot of the pass, and from the peak. The combined attack surprised the defenders and the engagement barely lasted six hours. Del Pilar was killed in the skirmish from a shot in the neck, killing him instantly. Of the 60 defenders, only eight remained. After the battle, Del Pilar's belongings were taken by the Americans as war trophies, including a handkerchief embroidered with the name Dolores, a locket with a picture of a girl, and his diary. His last entry was:

The General [Aguinaldo] has given me the pick of all the men that can be spared and ordered me to defend the Pass. I realize what a terrible task has been given me. And yet I felt that this is the most glorious moment of my life. What I do is done for my beloved country. No sacrifice can be too great.

Reports of Del Pilar's death varied. Two newsmen, John McCutcheon and Richard Henry Little, and a local newspaper called The Manila Freedom reported accounts which captured the imaginations of American and Filipino readers. McCutcheon and Little both reported how del Pilar was the last to fall; how he continually urged his men during the battle to fight on, appealing to their sense of love for their native land; how he refused to turn away on his white horse until all the men had retreated; and his death when a sharpshooter got the better of him. The Manila Freedom wrote this of Del Pilar:

It is said that in the battle against Major March's troops, Mr. Gregorio del Pilar, surrounded by the dead and the wounded falling by his side, fought a valiant defense, inspiring his troops by his example and, though gravely wounded, had stood atop the trench to animate then when a bullet pierced his heart and he fell among his comrades. When the American troops advanced they found the body of the general on the same spot where he had fallen and the expression on his face was of a command or a supreme desire abruptly interrupted. One of his hands, pressed to his heart, from which blood flowed, clutched a silk handkerchief embroidered with the name of his sweetheart.— The Manila Freedom

Filipino accounts of Del Pilar's death corroborate each other and are less glamorous. Del Pilar's aide-de-camp, Vicente Enríquez, writes:

I returned to the peak where I had left General del Pilar but midway up I saw him with Lietunants Eugenio [Telesforo] Carrasco and Vicente Morales and the bugler. I told him what I had seen. The general quickened his pace on learning that the Americans could be seen from a certain high point. We arrived at the upper trenches. Then we went to the hilltop where I was and the moment we got there we heard renewed firing and saw our soldiers giving battle. Our soldiers, pointing with their hands, warned del Pilar that the enemy was almost on top of us, but we could see nothing save an irregular movement in the cogongrass. So the general ordered a halt to the firing. And erect on the hilltop he tried to see and distinguish the enemy. While he was doing this he was hit by a bullet. The general covered his face with both hands, falling backward and dying instantly. He wore a new khaki uniform with his campaign insignia, his silver spurs, his polished shoulder straps, his silk handkerchiefs, his rings on his fingers. Always handsome and elegant!— Vicente Enriquez

Lieutenant Telesforo Carrasco also recounted:

The general could not see the enemy because of the cogon grass and he ordered a halt to the firing. At that moment I was handing him a carbine and warning him that the Americans were directing their fire at him and that he should crouch down because his life was in danger and at that moment he was hit by a bullet in the neck that caused instant death. on seeing that the general was dead, the soldiers jumped up as if to flee, but I aimed the carbine at them saying I would blow the skull off the brains of the first to run, whereupon they resumed firing while the body of the general was being removed to the next trench.— Telesforo Carrasco

Del Pilar's body lay unburied for days, exposed to the elements. While retracing the trail, an American officer, Lt. Dennis P. Quinlan, gave the body a traditional U.S. military burial. Upon Del Pilar's tombstone, Quinlan inscribed, "An Officer and a Gentleman".

In 1930, Del Pilar's body was exhumed and was identified by the gold tooth and braces he had installed while in exile in Hong Kong.[citation needed]

# Percy Pilcher

On 30 September 1899, having completed his triplane, he had intended to demonstrate it to a group of onlookers and potential sponsors in a field near Stanford Hall.  However, days before, the engine crankshaft had broken and, so as not to disappoint his guests, he decided to fly the Hawk instead.  The weather was stormy and rainy, but by 4 pm Pilcher decided the weather was good enough to fly. Whilst flying, the tail snapped and Pilcher plunged 10 metres (30 ft) to the ground: he died two days later from his injuries with his triplane having never been publicly flown.

He is buried in Brompton Cemetery, west London.

# Charles Alfred Pillsbury

In 1889, an English syndicate bought a controlling interest in the largest flour companies and mills in Minneapolis. The different business were combined under the name of The Pillsbury-Washburn Flour Mills Co. Pillsbury remained the manager and one of the three American directors of the company overseeing operations and not looking out for the company's assets.

Pillsbury died suddenly on September 17, 1899 from a heart ailment.

# James F. Post

Post died on July 15, 1899 at the age of 80. He was buried in Oakdale Cemetery, his wife Mary Ann later buried by his side when she died the following year in 1900.

# John F. Potter

Potter died at his home on May 18, 1899. He was interred beside his wife in the family plot at Oak Ridge Cemetery in East Troy. The Wisconsin Historical Society received his knife.

# Richard Deodatus Poulett-Harris

He died at Woodbridge, Tasmania, on 23 December 1899, and was survived by his wife, and of his first marriage: Georgiana (see above); Katharine (1847–1940); Charlotte Maria (1850–1941); Annie Louisa (1853–1922), and Lovell Andrews (1856–1929); and of his second marriage: Eleanor Mary (1865–1931), Henry Vere (1866–1933), Anna May (1869–1953), and Louisa Violet (b. 1873). Louisa's younger twin, Harriet Lily, died from Tubercular Peritonitis in 1897, aged 23, having been a teacher at the Ladies' Grammar School and Kindergarten in Davey Street, Hobart that was run by her sisters.  She is now regarded as the founder of women's cricket in Australia.  A memorial for her exists in the All Saints' Anglican Church in Macquarie Street, South Hobart.

Richard and his daughters Eleanor and Lily are buried in the same grave at Cornelian Bay Cemetery.

# William Burgess Pryer

Pryer completely retired from working in 1892 after an agreement with the supervisory board of the North Borneo Chartered Company to acquired his estate about 20 kilometres north of Sandakan along with a further property at Kabeli, an inflow of Sandakan Bay where Pryer used to cultivate sugar cane, nutmeg, cocoa, cotton, gambier plant and rubber. At the same time, his health have been getting worsened; as he was increasingly suffering from severe and unexplained painful conditions. Following this, Pryer decided to return to England in 1898. Pryer died on the way to England between 7–8 January 1899 at Suez and was buried there on 11 January. He left his wife without any children.

# Charles Ranhofer

Ranhofer and his wife Rose had five children: three sons and two daughters.  He died at home of Bright's Disease in 1899 and was buried at Woodlawn Cemetery in The Bronx, New York City.

# Shreemati Rasasundari

Rasasundari died in 1899.

# Henry Massey Rector

Rector died in Little Rock and is buried in Mount Holly Cemetery there.

# Myron W. Reed

Reed was stricken with fatal illness late in January 1899, lapsing into unconsciousness during his final hours. He died at 4:55 am on January 30 in Denver, with physicians listing the cause of death as chronic entero colitis inflammation. Reed was 62 years old at the time of his death.

The memorial service which followed was pointedly addressed by a representative of the three main religious tendencies of Colorado, led by the rabbi W. S. Friedman, the Roman Catholic priest William O'Ryan, and the Protestant minister Barton Aylesworth and addressed by several secular speakers. The Grand Army of the Republic and Masons, two organizations with which Reed was actively involved, were also made part of the proceedings. A committee of six state senators were appointed by Governor Charles S. Thomas, who also paved the way for Reed's body to lie in state in a closed casket at the Colorado State Capitol prior to internment.

Reed was survived by his wife and three children.

# Ernest Renshaw

He died of the effects of carbolic acid but whether taken intentionally or not the evidence did not show.

In 1983, Ernest Renshaw was elected posthumously into the International Tennis Hall of Fame together with his brother.

# Paul Reuter

Reuter died in 1899 at Villa Reuter in Nice, France. He was buried in West Norwood Cemetery in south London.

Reuter was portrayed by Edward G. Robinson in the Warner Bros. biographical film A Dispatch from Reuter's (1941).

The Reuters News Agency commemorated the 100th anniversary of the death of its founder by launching a university award (the Paul Julius Reuter Innovation Award) in Germany.

# Joseph J. Reynolds

Joseph Jones Reynolds died on February 25, 1899, in Washington, D.C., at the age of 77, and is buried in Arlington National Cemetery.

# Franklin D. Richards (Mormon apostle)

Richards suffered a stroke and paralysis in the autumn of 1899. He died peacefully in his home in Ogden, Utah, on December 9, 1899.

The vacancy in the quorum created by his death was filled by Reed Smoot.

# Riro Kāinga

In response to the abuses, Kāinga ignored warnings from his people and went to Valparaíso in late 1898 or early 1899 to air his grievances to the Chilean government. Accompanying him on the company's ship, the  Maria Luísa, were the Rapa Nui soldiers of the Chilean Army's Maipo Regiment: Juan Tepano Rano, Juan Araki Tiʻa, and José Pirivato. On the day of their arrival, the regional intendant offered to forward Kāinga's case to the government; however, the king insisted on meeting as equals with Cilean president Federico Errázuriz Echaurren. The delegation was hosted by Merlet's men (Jeffries and Alfredo Rodríguez) at a local tavern, and the king was invited to stay with Rodríguez while the soldiers went to their barracks. During the evening, the king was encouraged to drink heavily; the next morning his men were informed that he had been sent to Carlos Van Buren Hospital, where he died of alcohol poisoning. News of his death did not reach the island until March 1899. Although Merlet said that the young king drank himself to death, Rapa Nui oral tradition asserts that he was poisoned on Merlet's orders while he was in the hospital. Kāinga was buried in a pauper's grave in Valparaíso.

After the king's death, Angata assumed nominal leadership of the Miru clan. Kāinga's relatives unsuccessfully attempted to restore the kingship, despite Sánchez' orders abrogating the institution and forbidding the islanders from choosing a new king.[note 2] Fearing for her life, his widow Véronique married a Chilean shepherd on 29 January 1900. In 1902, Chile appointed Juan Tepano as cacique in an attempt to end indigenous resistance. Angata led an unsuccessful 1914 revolt to overthrow the company's control, and an independence movement has continued on the island. Kāinga's grandson, Valentino Riroroko Tuki, declared himself king of Rapa Nui in 2011.

Chilean President Michelle Bachelet repatriated Kāinga's remains to Easter Island in 2006, when they were received in a ceremony where the Rapa Nui flag flew alongside the Chilean flag. His surviving grandchildren (Benedicto, Valentino, Milagrosa, Ambrosio, Luís and María) participated in the ceremony. A bust of the king was erected by the Chilean Navy in front of the governor's office at Hanga Roa.

# Dominique-Napoléon Saint-Cyr

He died on March 3, 1899 in Quebec City.

# Joseph Salter (missionary)

Salter died on 3 March 1899. His residence at the time of his death was 377 East India Dock Road. Probate was granted in London to Emily Marion Gilley and her husband Samuel Gilley, inspector to a friendly society, in the amount of £1,853.

# Frederick A. Schroeder

Schroeder died in 1899 in New York. The cause of his death was pneumonia which he had contracted at the funeral of his daughter Mary Jane (born 1866). His wife (Mary Jane Schroeder, née Rusher, 1830—1913) who he had married in 1854, his son Edwin and five more daughters (Leonora Mary, born 1857, Harriet Louise, born 1861, wife of Schroeder's business partner Frank N. Arguimbau, Alice, born 1872 and Frances, born 1874) survived him. Schroeder was buried at Green-Wood Cemetery. Among his honorary pall-bearers were his former business associate Isidore M. Bon, brewer H. B. Scharmann, civil war veteran and Brooklyn Union Gas (now part of KeySpan Corporation) president James Jourdan, and former general and  Secretary of the Navy Benjamin F. Tracy.

Schroeder's death was mourned even back in his native town of Trier.

# George Escol Sellers

Sellers took up residence to Chattanooga, Tennessee, upon retirement.  He lived on Mission Ridge. He particularly indulged his taste for arts and the society of artists all his life. Sellers died at his home in Chattanooga when he was 90 years old on January 1, 1899.

# Thomas Jenkins Semmes

Semmes died in New Orleans in 1899 and is interred in Metairie Cemetery, he was President of The Boston Club 1883-1892.

# Aghbiur Serob

On 1 November 1899, while meeting with several other compatriots, Aghbiur Serob had his pipe poisoned by a fellow Armenian known as "Avé" who had been bribed by Kurdish brigands. The Kurdish brigands, led by Khalil, surrounded the house with hundreds of fighters. A gunfight erupted between the Kurds and the Armenians, the latter having in its ranks twelve of Serob's personal guard, his wife Sose and their son, Hagop. The Kurds managed to defeat the outnumbered Armenians, killing in the process Serob, his son, and twelve of his men including the town priest. Sose was wounded and taken prisoner. Khalil severed Serob's head and placed it on a pike as a warning to all other Armenian freedom fighters.

A mission led by fellow Armenian guerrilla, Zoravar Andranik Ozanian, tracked the Kurds to the home of "Avé", who, along with the Kurds and his own family, was killed.

# William Simpson (artist)

Simpson married late in life and had one daughter, Penelope, who eventually emigrated to Australia. 
He died at home in Willesden, North London, on 17 August 1899, and was buried in Highgate Cemetery.

Besides his war pictures, he covered state events, coronations, funerals, and other ceremonies. 
He was particularly interested in India and sketched scenes of the Kashmir Maharajas. 
He was a noted ethnographer and antiquarian, and wrote extensively on ancient religions, customs, and ancient artifacts.  
It is said that the Queen intervened to prevent him from going out to Italy in 1859, to cover the Austro-Sardinian War, for fear that he would get killed.

# William Crawford Smith

Smith died of heat exhaustion the Battle of Manila February 5, 1899 in Manila, The Philippines. His corpse was shipped back to San Francisco, California, where it received a Masonic service. Shortly after, his corpse was returned to Nashville, where it lay in the Nashville Masonic Temple, followed by a service in the Tabernacle. He was buried on April 19, 1899 at the Mount Olivet Cemetery.

In 1903, an honorary plaque from the Nashville Red Cross Society was installed inside the Parthenon. The ceremony was attended by Benton McMillin, who served as the Governor of Tennessee from 1899 to 1903.

The Parthenon has been listed on the National Register of Historic Places in Davidson County since February 23, 1972. Memorial Hall has been listed on the National Register of Historic Places in Wilson County since April 29, 1977. Meanwhile, one of Smith's apprentices, Clarence Kelley Colley, went on to become a renowned architect in his own right, with buildings listed on the National Register of Historic Places.

# Thomas Somers-Cocks

His wife died in the 1894 influenza epidemic. Cocks died on 30 August 1899 at Thames Bank, Great Marlow. Somers Place in the Christchurch (New Zealand) suburb of Spreydon is named after him. Mount Somers, both a township and a hill in the foothills of the Southern Alps, are named after him.

# Dai St. John

In September 1896, St. John joined the Grenadier Guards. In 1897 he was arrested for being absent without leave after leaving his post in London to fight in Cardiff. St. John was reported as being happy with life in the armed forces, he just found the restrictions connected with the job, limiting.

In 1898, after time spent serving in Gibraltar, St. John was posted on a Nile Expedition. This led to him seeing action at the Battle of Omdurman in Sudan. With the outbreak of the Second Boer War, St John was part of the 3rd Grenadier Guards sent to South Africa. On 23 November 1899, the 3rd Grenadier Guards were involved in the Battle of Belmont, and St John was amongst the troops pinned down at the base of Mount Belmont by Boer snipers on higher ground. When the decision was made to charge the position, St. John was at the forefront of his troop and engaged in hand-to-hand combat with the enemy. Reports vary widely, but it is stated that he killed between four and twelve combatants with his bayonet before his weapon became stuck in an enemy. On trying to retrieve his weapon he was shot in the temple and killed.

# Arthur Stark

During the siege of Ladysmith he was resident in the Royal Hotel, but spent the days in shell-proof dugouts along the Klip River, or fishing, while the town was being shelled by Boer forces. Stark had just returned and was standing on the hotel's veranda on the evening of 18 November 1899, when at 19:30 the Long Tom cannon stationed on Pepworth Hill fired two shots at the hotel. These were aimed at important persons who may have assembled there, probably Leander Starr Jameson, Prime Minister of the Cape Colony, and Colonel Francis Rhodes who were known to be in town.

Stark's legs were seriously injured by the second shell and he died shortly afterwards while undergoing surgery. Stark was buried in Ladysmith. H.W. Nevinson who was present at his burial records the irony of him being a strong opponent of the Chamberlain policy, and a vigorous denouncer of the war's injustice.

# Arthur Stayner

Stayner became a prominent citizen of Salt Lake City.  He died on 4 September 1899, from sepsis stemming from a lead pellet which became embedded in his heel.  Although amputation of his limb was considered by a physician, the infection had permeated his body and it was too late to save him.

Although Stayner was not interested in financial gain from sugar manufacture, because of his energetic work he is regarded as the "father and founder of the movement that made the manufacture of sugar in Utah a success."

# W. H. C. Stephenson

Stephenson died April 6, 1899 of lung disease. His funeral was at the St. John African Methodist Episcopal church and he was buried at Forest Lawn Cemetery.

# Marvin Stone

Stone used the newfound wealth from his straw business for a variety of philanthropic causes. He furnished lodging for his female employees, including a large library, music room, meeting room, and dancing floor. In addition, he and several others built two blocks of tenement houses for African American residents of Washington, D.C.

Stone died in his home in Columbia Road, Washington, D.C., on May 17, 1899 after a long illness. He was survived by his wife, Jane "Jennie" Platt. Stone is buried at Green Mount Cemetery in Baltimore, Maryland.

# Johann Strauss II

Strauss was diagnosed with pleuropneumonia, and on 3 June 1899 he died in Vienna, at the age of 73. He was buried in the Zentralfriedhof. At the time of his death, he was still composing his ballet Aschenbrödel.

As a result of the efforts by Clemens Krauss who performed a special all-Strauss programme in 1929 with the Vienna Philharmonic, Strauss's music is now regularly performed at the annual Vienna New Year's Concert. Distinguished Strauss interpreters include Willi Boskovsky, who carried on the Vorgeiger tradition of conducting with violin in hand, as was the Strauss family custom, as well as Herbert von Karajan, Carlos Kleiber, Lorin Maazel, Zubin Mehta and Riccardo Muti. In addition, the Wiener Johann Strauss Orchester, which was formed in 1966, pays tribute to the touring orchestras which once made the Strauss family so famous. In 1987 Dutch violinist and conductor André Rieu also created a Johann Strauss Orchestra.

Eduard Strauss had surprisingly wound up the Strauss Orchestra on 13 February 1901 after concerts in 840 cities around the globe, and had pawned the instruments. The orchestra's last violins were destroyed in the firestorm of the Second World War.

Most of the Strauss works that are performed today may once have existed in a slightly different form, as Eduard Strauss destroyed much of the original Strauss orchestral archives in a furnace factory in Vienna's Mariahilf district in 1907. Eduard, then the only surviving brother of the three, took this drastic precaution after agreeing to a pact between himself and brother Josef that whoever outlived the other was to destroy their works. The measure was intended to prevent the Strauss family's works from being claimed by another composer. This may also have been fueled by Strauss's rivalry with another of Vienna's popular waltz and march composers, Karl Michael Ziehrer.

Two museums in Vienna are dedicated to Johann Strauss II. His residence in the Praterstrasse where he lived in the 1860s is now part of the Vienna Museum. The Strauss Museum is about the whole family with a focus on Johann Strauss II.

# S. A. Saminatha Iyer

Swaminatha Iyer died on 12 August 1899.

# Penn Symons

In excruciating pain from a severe wound to his stomach, Symons was taken to the 20th Field Hospital at Dundee. Despite this, all that he wanted to know was, "have they got the hill?" While the battle was won, their position at Dundee quickly became untenable. After a few wasted days, Symons' replacement, Brigadier General Yule, decided to abandon the town along with the most severely wounded to the Boers, stealing away at night to Ladysmith. The next day, the town surrendered and thus Symons became a prisoner of war along with many others. He clearly felt betrayed by Yule and just before he died on 23 October he implored the medical officer, Major Donegan, to "tell everyone I died facing the enemy, tell everyone I died facing the enemy".

Winston Churchill wrote in his telegrams to The Morning Post:

So Sir Penn Symons is killed!  Well, no one would have laid down his life more gladly in such a cause.  Twenty years ago the merest chance saved him from the massacre at Islandhlwana, and Death promoted him in an afternoon from subaltern to senior captain.  Thenceforward his rise was rapid.  He commanded the First Division of the Tirah Expeditionary Force among the mountains with prudent skill.  His brigades had no misfortunes: his rearguards came safely into camp.  In the spring of 1898, when the army lay around Fort Jumrood, looking forward to a fresh campaign, I used often to meet him.  Everyone talked of Symons, of his energy, of his jokes, of his enthusiasm.  It was Symons who had built a racecourse on the stony plain; who had organised the Jumrood Spring Meeting; who won the principal event himself, to the delight of the private soldiers, with whom he was intensely popular; who, moreover, was to be first and foremost if the war with the tribes broke out again; and who was entrusted with much of the negotiations with their jirgas.  Dinner with Symons in the mud tower of Jumrood Fort was an experience.  The memory of many tales of sport and war remains.  At the end the General would drink the old Peninsular toasts: 'Our Men', 'Our Women', 'Our Religion', 'Our Swords', 'Ourselves', 'Sweethearts and Wives', and 'Absent Friends'–one for every night of the week.  The night I dined the toast was 'Our Men'.  May the State in her necessities find others like him!

The Durban Light Infantry erected a memorial stone over his grave at Dundee. Another monument to his valour was raised in Victoria Park, Saltash, Cornwall.

# Manuel Carrillo Tablas

On New Year's Eve 1899 Don Manuel Carrillo Tablas died. His son Don Manuel Carrillo Iturriaga (born in 1868 and who would served as Political Chief of the Canton of Orizaba during the early 1900s), would take up the helm as the head of the family. Don Manuel Carrillo Iturriaga married Doña María Limón (from San Luis Potosí) and both lived in Orizaba, Veracruz.
Don Manuel Carrillo Iturriaga would also serve in the Mexican Congress as a Diputado during the rewriting of the Mexican Constitution in 1917.

Because Don Manuel died without a will, the government of Mexico seized much of his possessions, leaving his children to battle the courts to retain what they could of their father's vast wealth. At the time of Don Manuel Carrillo Tablas' death, families of status and wealth were buried in private lots on their ranch. Looters disturbed the remains of Don Manuel searching for jewels and left Don Manuel's remains unearthed. His son, Don Manuel Carrillo Iturriaga, brought the remains to his family's Hacienda known as "El Molino de la Alianza." Upon the death of Don Manuel Carrillo Iturriaga, his daughter Doña Guadalupe Carrillo viuda de Ortega buried both her father and grandfather in the city's cemetery, in the family plot.  The renowned musician and Maestro Armando Ortega is also buried in the same family plot.

# Horace Tabor

Tabor ran without success for governor of Colorado governor in 1884, 1886, and 1888. Then, in 1893, the repeal of the Sherman Silver Purchase Act in the administration of President Grover Cleveland, devastated Tabor's fortune and his far-flung holdings were sold off. Still a respected public figure, he was made postmaster of Denver from January 4, 1898 until his death the following year.

When he became terminally ill with appendicitis in 1899, Tabor's final request of Baby Doe was that she maintain the Matchless claim. Legend reports that she did but later lost control of the mine. She lived in the tool shed of the Matchless mine for thirty years and died in that shed.

Augusta Tabor, however, prospered in her later years; on her death in 1895, she was among the wealthiest citizens of Denver.

When Horace Tabor died in 1899, flags were flown at half staff and ten thousand people were reported to have attended his funeral. His body was interred at Mt. Calvary Cemetery in Denver and later reinterred at Mt. Olivet Cemetery in Jefferson County, Colorado, where it now rests beside that of Baby Doe.

In his remembrance, there is a Tabor Lake at the base of Tabor Peak approximately 12 miles (19 km) southwest of Leadville, just south of Independence Pass.

The actor Don Haggerty played Tabor in the 1967 episode "Chicken Bill" of the syndicated television series Death Valley Days, hosted by Robert Taylor. Dub Taylor played the title role of the silver miner Chicken Bill Lovell, who in the story line salts his mine to get Tabor to pay off Lovell's lingering debt and to fund his continued operation.

# Charles Taylor (cavalryman)

Taylor attained the rank of First Sergeant before his death on August 3, 1899.  He is buried at Soldiers Home National Cemetery in plot K-0851.

# Dwight Townsend

He died in New York City on October 29, 1899. He was interred in Green-Wood Cemetery in Brooklyn, New York.

# Robert Trimble (politician)

Trimble died on 5 September 1899 at New Plymouth after having been unwell for a long time. He was survived by his wife, four sons and three daughters.

# John Troutbeck

Dying on 11 October 1899, at 4 Dean's Yard, Westminster, he was buried beside his wife in the cloisters of Westminster Abbey. His will, leaving effects of over 22,000 pounds, was proved on 18 November by his four children.

# John Wesley Turner

General Turner died in St. Louis, survived by his widow, two sons and two daughters. He was buried in Calvary Cemetery. He was one of the subscribers that helped found Washington University in St. Louis.

# Jonathan Baldwin Turner

Turner died at the age of 93, and is buried in Diamond Grove Cemetery in Jacksonville, Illinois.  Jonathan Baldwin Turner Hall at the University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign, Turner Hall at Illinois College, and Jonathan Turner Junior High School in Jacksonville are named in Turner's honor.  Turner's papers are held by the Illinois History and Lincoln Collections of the University of Illinois Library at Urbana-Champaign.

# Leopold Ullstein

Leopold Ullstein died 4 December 1899. He was 73 years old at the time of his death.

Ullstein's publishing empire was carried on after his death by his five children, one of whom, Hermann Ullstein, emigrated from Nazi Germany in December 1938 and published a history of the Ullstein firm.

Following the rise of Adolf Hitler and the Nazi Party in 1933, the Ullstein publishing empire was forcibly "Aryanized." In 1934 the firm, valued at 60 million marks, was sold under duress for 6 million marks.

# Robert B. Vance

Vance died near Asheville, North Carolina, at his farm, on November 28, 1899.

He and his brother, Zebulon, are interred at Riverside Cemetery in Asheville.

# Alfred Jefferson Vaughan Jr.

After the American Civil War ended in 1865, Vaughan returned to farming in Mississippi. In 1872 he moved to Tennessee, where into 1873 he participated in the Grange Movement at Memphis. He served as a general agent of the movement, responsible for the organization of state granges in Mississippi, Arkansas, and Tennessee. Vaughan also opened a mercantile business while in Memphis.

On November 4, 1876, Vaughan was the Grand Marshal at the Grand Democratic Rally at Memphis.  There were 4,000 people in the torchlight procession and 10,000 people at the assembly at the Exposition Building.  Other honored guests and speakers included Lucius Q. C. Lamar and former Gov. Isham Green Harris amongst other dignitaries.

In 1878 Vaughan was elected clerk of the criminal court of Shelby County, Tennessee, and was re-elected in 1882. From 1897 until his death Vaughan has the head of the United Confederate Veterans chapter in Tennessee. Also in 1897 he published his book Personal Record of the Thirteenth Regiment, Tennessee Infantry. He died two years later in Indianapolis, Indiana, and his body was returned to Memphis for burial in the city's Elmwood Cemetery.

# Hiram Walker

Walker had fallen ill many times since 1883.  Due to his illness, he spent a lot of time at home, and on the water in Lake Erie.  A popular spot in which he journeyed to often was an island he owned known as the Ile Aux Peche, which he sold to his daughter.  He lost feeling in his right leg around 1890 due to his rheumatism and walked with a cane.  In 1895, he suffered a severe paralytic stroke and lost the feeling in his legs two years later.  From April 1898 until his death, he suffered two cases of Congestive Apoplexy.  His second attack was on January 10, 1899.  Walker died two days later in Detroit, Michigan, January 12, 1899. He is buried at Elmwood Cemetery in Detroit.
His direct descendants are of the Julia Elizabeth (Walker) Buhl, Franklin MacFie Walker and Elizabeth Talman (Walker) Paterson families.

The news of the death of Walker took a large toll on the town.  Flags were lowered, and mayor Robert Kerr made a public statement.  Walker’s casket remained in his residence in Detroit until the funeral took place. The Detroit News reported that family, friends and fellow co-workers visited for hours prior to the funeral service on January 14, 1899.  The casket made entirely of metal, but covered with black and massive floral decorations, which was incredibly rare for the time.  The flowers were donated by Hiram Walker & Sons, along with the Children's Free Hospital.

# Isaac Newton Walker

Major Walker died in Lewistown on September 14, 1899. He had been seriously ill with pneumonia earlier that year, and at the time of his death was nearly blind and deaf. Following his death, a number of newspapers throughout the country published his obituary, including The Denver Evening Post and the New York Tribune. Walker was interred in Lewistown's Oak Hill Cemetery, which is slightly southwest of Walker's house. Oak Hill Cemetery is also the location of the "Lincoln pillars:" two sandstone columns that were retrieved from the burnt remains of the old Fulton County courthouse that Major Walker had designed.

Walker is mentioned by name in Edgar Lee Masters' Spoon River Anthology:<


And Major Walker who had talked
With venerable men of the revolution ...



This verse is from "The Hill," the introductory section of the work, and it likely refers to Walker having known such men as Thomas Jefferson, James Madison, and Henry Clay when he lived in Virginia. 

The burning of the courthouse that Walker designed is also immortalized in Masters' Spoon River Anthology, in the section "Silas Dement:"


And the Spoon River ladder company
Came with a dozen buckets and began to pour water
On the glorious bonfire, growing hotter,
Higher and brighter, till the walls fell in,
And the limestone columns where Lincoln stood
Crashed like trees when the woodman fells them ...



As has been noted, Masters engaged in poetic license regarding the effects of the fire. The columns were made of sandstone, not limestone, and they remained upright after the fire.

Major Walker's house, built in 1851, is still standing at 1127 N. Main Street in Lewistown. This ​1 1⁄2-story brick building with hard maple flooring and cherry wood trim was built on property that Walker had bought from Ossian Ross. The house is distinguished by corbie gables at the north and south ends. Blueprints of the house plan and floor plan are available from the Library of Congress as part of the Historic American Buildings Survey collection. The Walker house is slated for restoration to its original condition by the group Willing to Invest in Lewistown's Dream (WILD) in a project named "Restoration 1127."

# Anna Cabot Lowell Quincy Waterston

Waterston died October 14, 1899, at her home, No. 526 Massachusetts Avenue, in Newton, Massachusetts, where she lived since 1860, and is buried at Mount Auburn Cemetery. Her carved marble bust was sculpted by Edmonia Lewis and is held by the Smithsonian American Art Museum. In 2003, her diary, written at the age of seventeen, was posthumously published under the title A Woman's Wit and Whimsy.

# Thomas Welby

He was killed in a carriage accident at Jamestown on 6 January 1899.

# Hugh Grosvenor, 1st Duke of Westminster

In 1899, the last year of his life, he supported the Seats for Shops Assistants Bill (to reduce cruelty to women employees), stalked a stag in Scotland, shot 65 snipe in 1½ hours in Aldford on his Cheshire estate, and attended the wedding of one of his granddaughters. Later that year, while visiting the same granddaughter in Cranborne, Dorset, he developed bronchitis, from which he died.

He was cremated in Woking Crematorium and his ashes were buried in the churchyard of Eccleston Church, Cheshire. The 1st Duke of Westminster had two cenotaphs erected in his honour, one in the Grosvenor Chapel of Eccleston Church and another in the south transept of Chester Cathedral. Another memorial was a stained-glass window in the south transept of Westminster Abbey, dedicated by the Dean in September 1902.

He was succeeded as Duke of Westminster by his grandson, Hugh.  At his death he was "reputedly the wealthiest man in Britain"; his estate for the purposes of probate was £594,229 (equivalent to £65.7 million as of 2018), and his real estate (entailed therefore not included in his personal estate under the law of that time) was valued at about £6,000,000.

# Edward H. Williams

Williams was married to Cornella Bailey. They had three children:  Edward Higginson Williams Jr., William Williams, and Anna (Williams) Dreer.

Williams died on December 21, 1899 in Santa Barbara, California.

# James Williams (Delaware politician)

Williams lived quietly, died at Smyrna, and is buried there at the St. Peter's Episcopal Church Cemetery.

# Asa H. Willie

Willie died in Galveston on March 16, 1899. Interment was at Trinity Episcopal Church Cemetery, Galveston.

# Jennie Worrell

Worrell died in 1899 at the Kings County Hospital of burns she sustained while sleeping on the grass meadows at the foot of 17th Street, in Coney Island. She lived there destitute, having resided in Coney Island for some years after divorcing Murray. Police of the precinct had arrested her a number of times. Her sisters separated themselves from her years before
because of her degenerate lifestyle.

The New York Times reported that she was to be buried in Potter's Field in Flatbush, Brooklyn, unless someone claimed her body.

# Swami Yogananda

Yogananda died on 28 March 1899 after prolonged illness. He was the first to pass away among the direct monastic disciples of Ramakrishna and Sarada Devi.  During his illness he was served by Kalyanananda, a direct disciple of Vivekananda. Sister Nivedita was one of the witnesses to his death and she had described the moments of his passing away in one of her letters to Josephine MacLeod. During his last days he was nursed by Yogin Ma and his death affected Sarada Devi.

# H. Casey Young

Young died in Memphis, Tennessee on August 17, 1899, aged 70.  He is interred at Elmwood Cemetery.

# Nicholas Zammit

After all his vicissitudes, it appears that Zammit did not seem to want to leave the world without giving voice to his beliefs and concerns. This he did in his final writing – and the magnum opus of his conservative intellectual phase – which he named Pensieri d'un Retrogrado ("Reflections of Old Hand"1888).

After published this tome, Zammit retained his post at the Royal University of Malta for two more years, up till 1890. He now had seventy-five years of age, and had been Dean for the last fifteen of those. Zammit was succeeded by Francis Bonnici.

On his retirement, as a sign of gratitude the British government granted Zammit an annual pension of a hundred pounds (considerable for those days). He spent his last years in relative withdrawal at his residence at Sliema, Malta.

He died at home on 29 July 1899 at the age of 83. His funeral procession began at Sliema and proceeded to Siggiewi, where he had been born, and laid to rest at the cemetery there. A journalist who was at the funeral later commented that, considering the stature of the deceased, 'too few people, walking silently, accompanied the coffin'.

# George Zinn

George Zinn died in Harrisburg, Pennsylvania on April 25, 1899. He was interred in Harrisburg Cemetery in Harrisburg, Pennsylvania.
