Anton Bacalbașa



  Constantin Mille (first seated, from left) and the other members of Adevărul's editorial staff in 1897, after Toni's departure. Ioan and Constantin Bacalbașa stand directly behind Mille


Eventually, Bacalbașa formalized his split with the socialist party. From 1896, both he and his rival Scorțescu were members of a PNL splinter group, presided upon by lawyer Nicolae Fleva. He served the "Flevist" cause as a writer for Dreptatea daily, then as a public speaker, organizing rallies at Dacia Hall and agitating the public for the reinstatement of Ghenadie Petrescu as Metropolitan-Primate. All three Bacalbașas, together with Fleva and the Lumea Nouă socialists (represented by A. Ionescu), also protested when PNL Prime Minister Dimitrie Sturdza expelled Aromanian refugees for having questioned his Balkans policy. Soon, Toni embarked on an additional venture, creating a satirical magazine named after (and featuring stories with) Moș Teacă. In its first series, the periodical hosted a lampoon piece by the young leftist writer Gala Galaction and Toni's own satirical portrait of Caragiale as a political opportunist, gravitating between the Junimists and George Panu's Radicals.

The journalist settled down to a family life, marrying Alexandrina Scărișoreanu (who was ten years his younger). He also accepted an offer from Transylvania's Vatra magazine (co-edited by Caragiale) to set up its satirical supplement Hazul ("Fun"), but the venture failed to interest the public and was abandoned. On March 22, 1898, Bacalbașa began reissuing Moș Teacă, introduced as Jurnal Țivil și Cazon ("Civilian and Military Newspaper"). One of its preferred targets was Mille, referred to in the paper as Millu Crocodilu ("Mill[e] the Crocodile"). The co-author of such material was Ranetti-Namuna, who arrived there after a stint at Lupta.

During 1899, Bacalbașa followed Fleva's group as it merged into the Conservative Party. His presence alongside Maiorescu was recorded with displeasure by the Junimist Ioan Slavici, as one of the reasons why Conservative politics had become ineffectual. A Conservative cabinet was called to power, with Fleva as the Agriculture Minister, and Bacalbașa ran in the general election of 1899, earning an Ilfov County seat in the Assembly of Deputies. Toni still pursued his literary interests: together with "Constantin Ivan" (the common pseudonym of his two brothers), he wrote the 3-act political revue Pardon!.

This was to be his last known endeavor: on October 1, 1899, having contracted bacterial pneumonia, Bacalbașa died, and was buried at Bellu cemetery. Public mourning was taken up by both Fleva and Caragiale. According to the former: "Through every sort of trouble, through every storm I ever had to cross into, I felt strong knowing that Anton Bacalbașa was with me. It is to his talent, his heart and his friendship that I owe the best years of my public life." The same year, the PSDMR itself disappeared from the scene: Ioan Nădejde and his "generous ones" faction denounced socialist politics as too feeble for the Romanian context, and joined the PNL, leaving a minority, under C. Z. Buzdugan, I. C. Frimu and Christian Rakovsky, to establish a more radical workers' party (embryo of the post-1910 Social Democratic Party).