Edward Aveling



In 1897, Aveling left Marx and on 8 June that year secretly married an actress, Eva Frye, using his pen-name "Alec Nelson". He returned to Marx when he was struck down with kidney disease. After nursing him for some time, Eleanor Marx committed suicide mainly due to his infidelity.  A coroner's inquest delivered a verdict of "suicide while in a state of temporary insanity," clearing Aveling of criminal wrongdoing, but he was widely reviled throughout the socialist community as having caused Eleanor to take her life. It has even been suggested that Aveling might have murdered her. Aveling died four months later, on 2 August 1898, in Battersea of kidney disease. He was 48. His body was cremated at Woking Crematorium, Surrey, three days later.

Despite his prominence as a member of the fledgling British Marxist movement, no representatives of the Socialist or Labour movements were present at the funeral due to the widely held belief that he was responsible for Eleanor Marx's death.

Aveling was also disliked by many of his contemporaries for his tendency to borrow money from everyone. A biographer of Eleanor wrote in 1976:




The truth is that in moral terms Aveling presented something akin to an optical illusion: looked at in one light, he could be seen as feckless, happy-go-lucky but fundamentally sound; in another, as an unmitigated scoundrel. What, however, could not escape notice from any angle was his infinite propensity to borrow money, which age could not wither nor — more surprisingly — custom stale. He might be cheated...so that resigning from the Secular Society he was loaded with debt. Yet this hardly accounts for his habit of borrowing from the rich, the poor and the positively indigent for trifling amounts — though sometimes cleaning them out — since he never at any time — and this in an age of ostentatious spenders... — lived in a style above that of any other middle-class socialist who had neither business interests nor inherited wealth. *  *  *

It is not uncommon to come across individuals from whose company and a small sum of money one simultaneously parts. This compulsion to borrow is not easy to explain in those who are neither on their beam ends nor aspire to high living."


Although he had numerous relationships with women, as far as is known, Aveling had no children.