J. J. Goodwin



Goodwin died on 2 June 1898 at the age of 27. was cremated at Ootcamund (ooty) Christian crematory. Soon after Vivekananda, who was in India at that time, was informed about it. Very recently, in the same year, Vivekananda had received the news of Indian yogi Pavhari Baba's death too. According to Vivekananda researcher Pravrajika Vrajaprana after receiving the death news of Goodwin, Vivekananda was "visibly disturbed".

In August 1898 Vivekananda wrote in tribute:



With infinite sorrow I learn the sad news of Mr. Goodwin's departure from this life, the more so as it was terribly sudden and therefore prevented all possibilities of my being at his side at the time of death. The debt of gratitude I owe him can never be repaid, and those who think they have been helped by any thought of mine ought to know that almost every word of it was published through the untiring and most unselfish exertions of Mr. Goodwin. In him I have lost a friend true as steel, a disciple of never-failing devotion, a worker who knew not what tiring was, and the world is less rich by one of those few who are born, as it were, to live only for others.


Goodwin's mother and sister wrote to Swami Vivekananda in reply to his condolence letter, thanking him for the influence for good Vivekananda had been to Goodwin.

Swami Saradananda reported in his letter to Sara Bull on June 5, 1898, that Goodwin died on Thursday of typhoid fever. Alasinga Perumal also wrote a letter to Swami Vivekananda informing about the news of Goodwin's death. Sara Bull instructed Alasinga to collect the belongings of Goodwin and take care of necessary legal matters. Alasinga had noted that there were only a few belongings off Goodwin, a bicycle (out of order), a watch and a few papers. Sara also wrote a letter that was published in Brahmavadin on June 16. A part of her letter wrote, After his experience in New York as stenographer to the Swami, with whom he lived day and night for months, the beauty of life's highest realization, knowledge of the soul and of God, came to him as we know. His entire devotion to the Swami as the servant and friend was the fruit of his new hope and belief and the Swami's public lectures as recorded by Mr. Goodwin are his permanent contribution to us. This young man embodied the integrity and honour of the gentleman to enemy and friend alike, in brief; he was a true Englishman with the spirit of sympathy, responsive to the noble and divine wherever he found it, at home or abroad. 

An obituary was also published in Lahore Tribune which was also published in Indian Mirror. Lahore Tribune mentioned about his trips with Vivekananda to Lahore and Jammu in 1897.