Riro Kāinga



In response to the abuses, Kāinga ignored warnings from his people and went to Valparaíso in late 1898 or early 1899 to air his grievances to the Chilean government. Accompanying him on the company's ship, the  Maria Luísa, were the Rapa Nui soldiers of the Chilean Army's Maipo Regiment: Juan Tepano Rano, Juan Araki Tiʻa, and José Pirivato. On the day of their arrival, the regional intendant offered to forward Kāinga's case to the government; however, the king insisted on meeting as equals with Cilean president Federico Errázuriz Echaurren. The delegation was hosted by Merlet's men (Jeffries and Alfredo Rodríguez) at a local tavern, and the king was invited to stay with Rodríguez while the soldiers went to their barracks. During the evening, the king was encouraged to drink heavily; the next morning his men were informed that he had been sent to Carlos Van Buren Hospital, where he died of alcohol poisoning. News of his death did not reach the island until March 1899. Although Merlet said that the young king drank himself to death, Rapa Nui oral tradition asserts that he was poisoned on Merlet's orders while he was in the hospital. Kāinga was buried in a pauper's grave in Valparaíso.



  Kāinga's cousin, Angata, in 1914


After the king's death, Angata assumed nominal leadership of the Miru clan. Kāinga's relatives unsuccessfully attempted to restore the kingship, despite Sánchez' orders abrogating the institution and forbidding the islanders from choosing a new king.[note 2] Fearing for her life, his widow Véronique married a Chilean shepherd on 29 January 1900. In 1902, Chile appointed Juan Tepano as cacique in an attempt to end indigenous resistance. Angata led an unsuccessful 1914 revolt to overthrow the company's control, and an independence movement has continued on the island. Kāinga's grandson, Valentino Riroroko Tuki, declared himself king of Rapa Nui in 2011.

Chilean President Michelle Bachelet repatriated Kāinga's remains to Easter Island in 2006, when they were received in a ceremony where the Rapa Nui flag flew alongside the Chilean flag. His surviving grandchildren (Benedicto, Valentino, Milagrosa, Ambrosio, Luís and María) participated in the ceremony. A bust of the king was erected by the Chilean Navy in front of the governor's office at Hanga Roa.