Garret Hobart



By late 1898, Hobart had fallen ill with a serious heart ailment, which he at first concealed from the public.  He continued Senate duty, but nearly collapsed after delivering an address closing the session.  He accompanied the President on a vacation trip to Hanna's winter home in Thomasville, Georgia, but quickly contracted the flu and returned to Washington.  By April 1899, Hobart's illness was well known in the press, though Hanna assured the newspapers that Hobart would be on the ticket in 1900:  "nothing but death or an earthquake can stop the re-nomination of Vice President Hobart".  Hobart rented a home in his birthplace of Long Branch, then an upscale Jersey Shore resort.  Doctors prescribed complete rest, and the Vice President amused himself by feeding two pet fish, a gold one named McKinley and a silver one named Bryan.



  Mausoleum of Garret and Jennie Hobart, Cedar Lawn Cemetery, Paterson. Erected 1902.


Despite his vice president's ill health, McKinley called upon him to break the news to Secretary of War Russell Alger that McKinley wanted him to resign—the secretary had ignored or misunderstood repeated hints from the President.  According to McKinley biographer Margaret Leech, "The President did not show his usual hypersensitive regard for other people's feelings in handing over to a sick man a disagreeable task which it was his own duty to perform."  Hobart invited Alger to Long Branch for the weekend, and broke the news; Alger duly submitted his resignation to McKinley.  Hobart's condition worsened within days of the Alger visit, and he was soon bedridden.  The New York Sun attributed Alger's resignation to Hobart's "crystal insight" and "velvet tact"; after which Hobart wrote to McKinley, "My 'crystal insight' is still clear, but the nap is slightly worn off my velvet tact".

After a vacation with the McKinleys on Lake Champlain, Hobart returned to Paterson in September.  On November 1, 1899, the government announced that Hobart would not return to public life.  His condition deteriorated rapidly, and he died on November 21, 1899, at age 55.  President McKinley told the family, "No one outside of this home feels this loss more deeply than I do."

New Jersey Governor Foster Voorhees ordered that state buildings be draped in mourning for 30 days, and that flags be flown at half staff until Hobart's funeral.  Hobart's home, Carroll Hall, was opened to the public for four hours so that citizens might pass by his open casket; 12,000 people did so.  Hobart was laid to rest at Cedar Lawn Cemetery in Paterson after a large public funeral, attended by President McKinley and many high government officials.  Although the large government delegation meant that few local people could attend the service, a crowd of 50,000 came to Paterson to honor Hobart.

The mausoleum over the grave was erected in 1901. His wife purchased eleven plots adjoining the family plot to accommodate the structure. The building has massive marble columns in the front with a heavy metal door; on the back above the sarcophagus is a stained glass window. There are two sarcophagi in the center of the building, for Garret Hobart and his wife. Around the tomb are niches for other members of the family. At the time of construction in 1901, the mausoleum cost about $80,000.