John G. S. Coghill



  The grave of J G S Coghill, Dean Cemetery


In 1869 Coghill returned to Edinburgh and was elected to the Fellowship of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh. He resumed his association with James Young Simpson, who was already by this time involved in his pioneering work on anesthesia in obstetrics. Coghill undertook the editing of some of Simpson’s papers and he delivered lectures on his behalf to the university students, on the subject of general pathology and pathological anatomy. He also attended to Simpson professionally during his final illness.

Failing to be elected as chair of obstetrics at the University of Edinburgh in 1875, a position which was controversially given to James Young Simpson (the nephew of the above mentioned Professor), Coghill and family moved to Ventnor, in the Isle of White. He went to work in the Royal National Hospital for Consumption and Diseases of the Chest which opened in 1868 and was its first consulting physician. The hospital was founded by Arthur Hill Hassal had himself suffered from tuberculosis while he was senior physician to the Royal Free Hospital, London and had moved to the Isle of Wight in search of a cure. The hospital became a part of the National Health Service in 1948.

Coghill embraced the field of tuberculosis enthusiastically although not wholly abandoning his interests as a generalist and in gynaecology. In 1894 he became a Knight Commander of the Order of St. Sava, from the Kingdom of Serbia, for his scientific contributions. He was elected a Corresponding Fellow of the Gynaecological Society of Boston; as Vice President of the British Gynaecological Association he addressed the appropriate section of the BMA meeting in 1881 and in 1887 was Vice President of the Therapeutics section of the International Medical Congress held in Washington USA. In 1888 he had the honour of receiving Queen Victoria on her visit to the hospital (his young son Harold ‘in Highland dress’ presented her with a bouquet).

He died in Ventnor on 5 June 1899 but is buried with his parents in Dean Cemetery in the west of the city. The grave is marked by a pale granite Celtic cross and lies in the small central southern section.