Margaret Anna Cusack



This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Margaret Anna Cusack" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR  (November 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)


In Newark, she once again came into controversy with the local Catholic hierarchy, this time regarding among other things, funding. and her public support of a suspended priest. She wrote a 176 page pamphlet entitled, "The Question of Today: Anti-Poverty and Progress, Labor and Capital". In it she defended social reformer Father Edward McGlynn. McGlynn was a vocal supporter of the political and economic views of Henry George, which some considered to border on socialism. George was popular with labor organizers, radicals, socialists, and Irish nationalists. Cardinal John McCloskey had reprimanded McGlynn and ordered him not to defend these views in public. McCloskey's successor, Archbishop Michael Corrigan ordered McGlynn to refrain from politics. McGlynn not only gave an address in support of George, (which earned him a two week suspension), but made the rounds of the polls with George on election day. He also publicly criticized a pastoral letter Corrigan had issued condemning theories that would violate an individual's right to private property. Corrigan then temporarily suspended McGlynn from his priestly functions for a second time. Corrigan viewed Cusack's pamphlet as an attack on the authority of the church, and demanded an apology. She attempted to halt its publication, but was unsuccessful. Her involvement in the New York City political campaign generated a good deal of controversy. Cusack resigned as head of her order.

She returned to the Anglican Communion and issued The Nun of Kenmare: An Autobiography the following year. Afterwards she lectured and wrote a number of anti-Catholic books: The Black Pope: History of the Jesuits, What Rome Teaches (1892) and Revolution and War, the secret conspiracy of the Jesuits in Great Britain (published posthumously, 1910).
She died on 5 June 1899, aged 70, and was buried in a Church of England-reserved burial site at Leamington Spa, Warwickshire, England.

Margaret Anna Cusack passed into obscurity for a long time, until as a result of Vatican II, religious orders were encouraged to review their roots and the intent of their founders. Since then there have been a number a studies on Cusack, such as Sister Philomena McCarthy's The Nun of Kenmare: The True Facts. With the rediscovery of the life and times of Margaret Anna Cusack, she has been hailed as a feminist -or not, and a social reformer ahead of her times.