Penn Symons



In excruciating pain from a severe wound to his stomach, Symons was taken to the 20th Field Hospital at Dundee. Despite this, all that he wanted to know was, "have they got the hill?" While the battle was won, their position at Dundee quickly became untenable. After a few wasted days, Symons' replacement, Brigadier General Yule, decided to abandon the town along with the most severely wounded to the Boers, stealing away at night to Ladysmith. The next day, the town surrendered and thus Symons became a prisoner of war along with many others. He clearly felt betrayed by Yule and just before he died on 23 October he implored the medical officer, Major Donegan, to "tell everyone I died facing the enemy, tell everyone I died facing the enemy".



  The Symons monument, Saltash


Winston Churchill wrote in his telegrams to The Morning Post:



.mw-parser-output .templatequote{overflow:hidden;margin:1em 0;padding:0 40px}.mw-parser-output .templatequote .templatequotecite{line-height:1.5em;text-align:left;padding-left:1.6em;margin-top:0}
So Sir Penn Symons is killed!  Well, no one would have laid down his life more gladly in such a cause.  Twenty years ago the merest chance saved him from the massacre at Islandhlwana, and Death promoted him in an afternoon from subaltern to senior captain.  Thenceforward his rise was rapid.  He commanded the First Division of the Tirah Expeditionary Force among the mountains with prudent skill.  His brigades had no misfortunes: his rearguards came safely into camp.  In the spring of 1898, when the army lay around Fort Jumrood, looking forward to a fresh campaign, I used often to meet him.  Everyone talked of Symons, of his energy, of his jokes, of his enthusiasm.  It was Symons who had built a racecourse on the stony plain; who had organised the Jumrood Spring Meeting; who won the principal event himself, to the delight of the private soldiers, with whom he was intensely popular; who, moreover, was to be first and foremost if the war with the tribes broke out again; and who was entrusted with much of the negotiations with their jirgas.  Dinner with Symons in the mud tower of Jumrood Fort was an experience.  The memory of many tales of sport and war remains.  At the end the General would drink the old Peninsular toasts: 'Our Men', 'Our Women', 'Our Religion', 'Our Swords', 'Ourselves', 'Sweethearts and Wives', and 'Absent Friends'–one for every night of the week.  The night I dined the toast was 'Our Men'.  May the State in her necessities find others like him!



  Victoria Park, Saltash


The Durban Light Infantry erected a memorial stone over his grave at Dundee. Another monument to his valour was raised in Victoria Park, Saltash, Cornwall.